THE SHEPHERD AND THE DAUGHTER OF THE SUN
from "The Incas of Peru" by Sir Clements Markham, London, Smith Elder & Co. 1910 pp. 408-415.

IN THE SNOW-CLAD CORDILLERA above the valley of Yucay, called Pitu-siray, a shepherd watched the flock of white llamas intended for the Inca to sacrifice to the Sun. He was a native of Laris, named Acoya-napa, a very well disposed and gentle youth. He strolled behind his flock, and presently began to play upon his flute very softly and sweetly, neither feeling anything of the amorous desires of youth, nor knowing anything of them.

He was carelessly playing his flute one day when two daughters of the Sun came to him. They could wander in all directions over the green meadows, and never failed to find one of their houses at night, where the guards and porters looked out that nothing came that could do them harm. Well! the two girls came to the place where the shepherd rested quite at his ease, and they asked him about his llamas.

The shepherd, who had not seen them until they spoke, was surprised, and fell on his knees, thinking that they were the embodiments of two out of the four crystalline fountains which were very famous in those parts. So he did not dare to answer them. They repeated their question about the flock, and told him not to be afraid, for they were children of the Sun, who was lord of all the land, and to give him confidence they took him by the arm. Then the shepherd stood up and kissed their hands. After talking together for some time the shepherd said that it was time for him to collect his flock, and asked their permission. The elder princess, named Chuqui-llantu, had been struck by the grace and good disposition of the shepherd. She asked him his name and of what place he was a native. He replied that his home was at Laris and that his name was Acoya-napa. While he was speaking Chuqui-llantu cast her eyes upon a plate of silver which the shepherd wore over his forehead, and which shone and glittered very prettily. Looking closer she saw on it two figures, very subtilely contrived, who were eating a heart. Chuqui-llantu asked the shepherd the name of that silver ornament, and he said it was called utusi. The princess returned it to the shepherd, and took leave of him, carrying well in her memory the name of the ornament and the figures, thinking with what delicacy they were drawn, almost seeming to her to be alive. She talked about it with her sister until they came to their palace. On entering, the doorkeepers looked to see if they brought with them anything that would do harm, because it was often found that women had brought with them, hidden in their clothes, such things as fillets and necklaces. After having looked well, the porters let them pass, and they found the women of the Sun cooking and preparing food. Chuqui-llantu said that she was very tired with her walk, and that she did not want any supper. All the rest supped with her sister, who thought that Acoya-napa was not one who could cause inquietude. But Chuqui-llantu was unable to rest owing to the great love she felt for the shepherd Acoya-napa, and she regretted that she had not shown him what was in her breast. But at last she went to sleep.

In the palace there were many richly furnished apartments in which the women of the Sun dwelt. These virgins were brought from all the four provinces which were subject to the Inca, namely Chincha-suyu, Cunti-suyu, Anti-suyu and Colla-suyu. Within, there were four fountains which flowed towards the four provinces, and in which the women bathed, each in the fountain of the province where she was born. They named the fountains in this way. That of Chincha-suyu was called Chuclla-puquio, that of Cunti-suyu was known as Ocoruro-puquio, Siclla-puquio was the fountain of Anti-suyu, and Llulucha-puquio of Colla-suyu. The most beautiful child of the Sun, Chuqui-llantu, was wrapped in profound sleep. She had a dream. She thought she saw a bird flying from one tree to another, and singing very softly and sweetly. After having sung for some time, the bird came down and regarded the princess, saying that she should feel no sorrow, for all would be well. The princess said that she mourned for something for which there could be no remedy. The singing bird replied that it would find a remedy, and asked the princess to tell her the cause of her sorrow. At last Chuqui-llantu told the bird of the great love she felt for the shepherd boy named Acoya-napa, who guarded the white flock. Her death seemed inevitable. She could have no cure but to go to him whom she so dearly loved, and if she did her father the Sun would order her to be killed. The answer of the singing bird, by name Checollo, was that she should arise and sit between the four fountains. There she was to sing what she had most in her memory. If the fountains repeated her words, she might then safely do what she wanted. Saying this the bird flew away, and the princess awoke. She was terrified. But she dressed very quickly and put herself between the four fountains. She began to repeat what she remembered to have seen of the two figures on the silver plate, singing:

"Micuc isutu cuyuc utusi cucim."

Presently all the fountains began to sing the same verse.

Seeing that all the fountains were very favourable, the princess went to repose for a little while, for all night she had been conversing with the checollo in her dream.

When the shepherd boy went to his home he called to mind the great beauty of Chuqui-llantu. She had aroused his love, but he was saddened by the thought that it must be love without hope. He took up his flute and played such heart-breaking music that it made him shed many tears, and he lamented, saying: "Ay! ay! ay! for the unlucky and sorrowful shepherd, abandoned and without hope, now approaching the day of your death, for there can be no remedy and no hope." Saying this, he also went to sleep.

The shepherd's mother lived in Laris, and she knew, by her power of divination, the cause of the extreme grief into which her son was plunged, and that he must die unless she took order for providing a remedy. So she set out for the mountains, and arrived at the shepherd's hut at sunrise. She looked in and saw her son almost moribund, with his face covered with tears. She went in and awoke him. When he saw who it was he began to tell her the cause of his grief, and she did what she could to console him. She told him not to be downhearted, because she would find a remedy within a few days. Saying this she departed and, going among the rocks, she gathered certain herbs which are believed to be cures for grief. Having collected a great quantity she began to cook them, and the cooking was not finished before the two princesses appeared at the entrance of the hut. For Chuqui-llantu, when she was rested, had set out with her sister for a walk on the green slopes of the mountains, taking the direction of the hut. Her tender heart prevented her from going in any other direction. When they arrived they were tired, and sat down by the entrance. Seeing an old dame inside they saluted her, and asked her if she could give them anything to eat. The mother went down on her knees and said she had nothing but a dish of herbs. She brought it to them, and they began to eat with excellent appetites. Chuqui-llantu then walked round the hut without finding what she sought, for the shepherd's mother had made Acoya-napa lie down inside the hut, under a cloak. So the princess thought that he had gone after his flock. Then she saw the cloak and told the mother that it was a very pretty cloak, asking where it came from. The old woman told her that it was a cloak which, in ancient times, belonged to a woman beloved by Pachacamac, a deity very celebrated in the valleys on the coast. She said it had come to her by inheritance; but the princess, with many endearments, begged for it until at last the mother consented. When Chuqui-llantu took it into her hands she liked it better than before and, after staying a short time longer in the hut, she took leave of the old woman, and walked along the meadows looking about in hopes of seeing him whom she longed for.

We do not treat further of the sister, as she now drops out of the story, but only of Chuqui-llantu. She was very sad and pensive when she could see no signs of her beloved shepherd on her way back to the palace. She was in great sorrow at not having seen him, and when, as was usual, the guards looked at what she brought, they saw nothing but the cloak. A splendid supper was provided, and when every one went to bed the princess took the cloak and placed it at her bedside. As soon as she was alone she began to weep, thinking of the shepherd. She fell asleep at last, but it was not long before the cloak was changed into the being it had been before. It began to call Chuqui-llantu by her own name. She was terribly frightened, got out of bed, and beheld the shepherd on his knees before her, shedding many tears. She was satisfied on seeing him, and inquired how he had got inside the palace. He replied that the cloak which she carried had arranged about that. then Chuqui-llantu embraced him, and put her finely worked lipi mantles on him, and they slept together. When they wanted to get up in the morning, the shepherd again became the cloak. As soon as the sun rose, the princess left the palace of her father with the cloak, and when she reached a ravine in the mountains, she found herself again with her beloved shepherd, who had been changed into himself. But one of the guards had followed them, and when he saw what had happened he gave the alarm with loud shouts. The lovers fled into the mountains which are near the town of Calca. Being tired after a long journey, they climbed to the top of a rock and went to sleep. They heard a great noise in their sleep, so they arose. The princess took one shoe in her hand and kept the other on her foot. Then looking towards the town of Calca both were turned into stone. To this day the two statues may be seen between Calca and Huayllapampa.

VIRACOCHA AND THE COMING OF THE INCAS

THE NATIVES OF THIS LAND affirm that in the beginning, and before this world was created, there was a being called Viracocha. He created a dark world without sun, moon or stars. Owing to this creation he was named Viracocha Pachayachachi, which means "Creator of all things." And when he had created the world he formed a race of giants of disproportioned greatness painted and sculptured, to see whether it would be well to make real men of that size. He then created men in his likeness as they are now; and they lived in darkness.

Viracocha ordered these people that they should live without quarrelling, and that they should know and serve him. He gave them a certain precept which they were to observe on pain of being confounded if they should break it. They kept this precept for some time, but it is not mentioned what it was. But as there arose among them the vices of pride and covetousness, they transgressed the precept of Viracocha Pachayachachi and falling, through this sin, under his indignation, he confounded and cursed them. Then some were turned into stones, others into other things, some were swallowed up by the earth, others by the sea, and over all there came a general flood which they call uñu pachacuti, which means "water that overturns the land." They say that it rained 60 days and nights, that it drowned all created things, and that there alone remained some vestiges of those who were turned into stones, as a memorial of the event, and as an example to posterity, in the edifices of Pucara, which are 60 leagues from Cuzco.

Some of the nations, besides the Cuzcos, also say that a few were saved from this flood to leave descendants for a future age. Each nation has its special fable which is told by its people, of how their first ancestors were saved from the waters of the deluge. That the ideas they had in their blindness may be understood, I will insert only one, told by the nation of the Cañaris, a land of Quito and Tumibamba, 400 leagues from Cuzco and more.

They say that in the time of the deluge called uñu pachacuti there was a mountain named Guasano in the province of Quito and near a town called Tumipampa. The natives still point it out. Up this mountain went two of the Cañaris named Ataorupagui and Cusicayo. As the waters increased the mountain kept rising and keeping above them in such a way that it was never covered by the waters of the flood. In this way the two Cañaris escaped. These two, who were brothers, when the waters abated after the flood, began to sow. One day when they had been at work, on returning to their but, they found in it some small loaves of bread, and a jar of chicha, which is the beverage used in this country in place of wine, made of boiled maize. They did not know who had brought it, but they gave thanks to the Creator, eating and drinking of that provision. Next day the same thing happened. As they marvelled at this mystery, they were anxious to find out who brought the meals. So one day they hid themselves, to spy out the bringers of their food. While they were watching they saw two Cañari women preparing the victuals and putting them in the accustomed place. When about to depart the men tried to seize them, but they evaded their would-be captors and escaped. The Cañaris, seeing the mistake they had made in molesting those who had done them so much good, became sad and prayed to Viracocha for pardon for their sins, entreating him to let the women come back and give them the accustomed meals. The Creator granted their petition. The women came back and said to the Cañaris--"The Creator has thought it well that we should return to you, lest you should die of hunger." They brought them food. Then there was friendship between the women and the Cañari brothers, and one of the Cañari brothers had connexion with one of the women. Then, as the elder brother was drowned in a lake which was near, the survivor married one of the women, and had the other as a concubine. By them he had ten sons who formed two lineages of five each, and increasing in numbers they called one Hanansaya which is the same as to say the upper party, and the other Hurinsaya, or the lower party. From these all the Cañaris that now exist are descended.

In the same way the other nations have fables of how some of their people were saved, from whom they trace their origin and descent. But the Incas and most of those of Cuzco, those among them who are believed to know most, do not say that anyone escaped from the flood, but that Viracocha began to create men afresh, as will be related further on. One thing is believed among all the nations of these parts, for they all speak generally and as well known of the general flood which they call uñu pachacuti. From this we may clearly understand that if, in these parts they have a tradition of the great flood, this great mass of the floating islands which they afterwards called the Atlanticas, and now the Indies of Castille, or America, must have begun to receive a population immediately after the flood, although, by their account, the details are different from those which the true Scriptures teach us. This must have been done by divine Providence, through the first people coming over the land of the Atlantic Island, which was joined to this, as has been already said. For as the natives, though barbarous, give reasons for their very ancient settlement, by recording the flood, there is no necessity for setting aside the Scriptures by quoting authorities to establish this origin. We now come to those who relate the events of the second age after the flood, which is the subject of the next chapter.
FABLE OF THE SECOND AGE, AND CREATION OF THE BARBAROUS INDIANS ACCORDING TO THEIR ACCOUNT

IT IS RELATED that everything was destroyed in the flood called uñu pachacuti. It must now be known that Viracocha Pachayachachi, when he destroyed that land as has been already recounted, preserved three men, one of them named Taguapaca, that they might serve and help him in the creation of new people who had to be made in the second age after the deluge, which was done in this manner. The flood being passed and the land dry, Viracocha determined to people it a second time, and, to make it more perfect, he decided upon creating luminaries to give it light. With this object he went, with his servants, to a great lake in the Collao, in which there is an island called Titicaca, the meaning being "the rock of lead," of which we shall treat in the first part. Viracocha went to this island, and presently ordered that the sun, moon, and stars should come forth, and be set in the heavens to give light to the world, and it was so. They say that the moon was created brighter than the sun, which made the sun jealous at the time when they rose into the sky. So the sun threw over the moon's face a handful of ashes, which gave it the shaded colour it now presents. This frontier lake of Chucuito, in the territory of the Collao, is 57 leagues to the south of Cuzco. Viracocha gave various orders to his servants, but Taguapaca disobeyed the commands of Viracocha. So Viracocha was enraged against Taguapaca, and ordered the other two servants to take him, tie him hands and feet, and launch him in a balsa on the lake. This was done. Taguapaca was blaspheming against Viracocha for the way he was treated, and threatening that he would return and take vengeance, when he was carried by the water down the drain of the same lake, and was not seen again for a long time. This done, Viracocha made a sacred idol in that place, as a place for worship and as a sign of what he had there created.

Leaving the island, he passed by the lake to the main land, taking with him the two servants who survived. He went to a place now called Tiahuanacu in the province of Collasuyu, and in this place he sculptured and designed on a great piece of stone, all the nations that he intended to create. This done, he ordered his two servants to charge their memories with the names of all tribes that he had depicted, and of the valleys and provinces where they were to come forth, which were those of the whole land. He ordered that each one should go by a different road, naming the tribes, and ordering them all to go forth and people the country. His servants, obeying the command of Viracocha, set out on their journey and work. One went by the mountain range or chain which they call the heights over the plains on the South Sea. The other went by the heights which overlook the wonderful mountain ranges which we call the Andes, situated to the east of the said sea. By these roads they went, saying with a loud voice "Oh you tribes and nations, hear and obey the order of Ticci Viracocha Pachayachachi, which commands you to go forth, and multiply and settle the land." Viracocha himself did the same along the road between those taken by his two servants, naming all the tribes and places by which he passed. At the sound of his voice every place obeyed, and people came forth, some from lakes, others from fountains, valleys, caves, trees, rocks and hills, spreading over the land and multiplying to form the nations which are to-day in Peru.

Others affirm that this creation of Viracocha was made from the Titicaca site where, having originally formed some shapes of large strong men which seemed to him out of proportion, he made them again of his stature which was, as they say, the average height of men, and being made he gave them life. Thence they set out to people the land. As they spoke one language previous to starting, they built those edifices, the ruins of which may still be seen, before they set out. This was for the residence of Viracocha, their maker. After departing they varied their languages, noting the cries of wild beasts, insomuch that, coming across each other afterwards, those could not understand who had before been relations and neighbours.

Whether it was in one way or the other, all agree that Viracocha was the creator of these people. They have the tradition that he was a man of medium height, white and dressed in a white robe like an alb secured round the waist, and that he carried a staff and a book in his hands.

Besides this they tell of a strange event; how that Viracocha, after he had created all people, went on his road and came to a place where many men of his creation had congregated. This place is now called Cacha. When Viracocha arrived there, the inhabitants were estranged owing to his dress and bearing. They murmured at it and proposed to kill him from a hill that was near. They took their weapons there, and gathered together with evil intentions against Viracocha. He, falling on his knees on some plain ground, with his hands clasped, fire from above came down upon those on the hill, and covered all the place, burning up the earth and stones like straw. Those bad men were terrified at the fearful fire. They came down from the hill, and sought pardon from Viracocha for their sin. Viracocha was moved by compassion. He went to the flames and put them out with his staff. But the hill remained quite parched up, the stones being rendered so light by the burning that a very large stone which could not have been carried on a cart, could be raised easily by one man. This may be seen at this day, and it is a wonderful sight to behold this hill, which is a quarter of a league in extent, all burnt up. It is in the Collao.

After this Viracocha continued his journey and arrived at a place called Urcos, 6 leagues to the south of Cuzco. Remaining there some days he was well served by the natives of that neighborhood. At the time of his departure, he made them a celebrated huaca or statue, for them to offer gifts to and worship; to which statue the Incas, in after times, offered many rich gifts of gold and other metals, and above all a golden bench. When the Spaniards entered Cuzco they found it, and appropriated it to themselves. It was worth $17,000. The Marquis Don Francisco Pizarro took it himself, as the share of the General.

Returning to the subject of the fable, Viracocha continued his journey, working his miracles and instructing his created beings. In this way he reached the territory on the equinoctial line, where are now Puerto Viejo and Manta. Here he was joined by his servants. Intending to leave the land of Peru, he made a speech to those he had created, apprising them of the things that would happen. He told them that people would come, who would say that they were Viracocha their creator, and that they were not to believe them; but that in the time to come he would send his messengers who would protect and teach them. Having said this he went to sea with his two servants, and went travelling over the water as if it was land, without sinking. For they appeared like foam over the water, and the people, therefore, gave them the name of Viracocha which is the same as to say the grease or foam of the sea. At the end of some years after Viracocha departed, they say that Taguapaca, whom Viracocha ordered to be thrown into the lake of Titicaca in the Collao, as has already been related, came back and began, with others, to preach that he was Viracocha. Although at first the people were doubtful, they finally saw that it was false, and ridiculed them.

This absurd fable of their creation is held by these barbarians and they affirm and believe it as if they had really seen it to happen and come to pass.
THE ANCIENT FREEDOMS OF THESE KINGDOMS OF PERU AND THEIR PROVINCES

It is important to note that these barbarians could tell nothing more respecting what happened from the second creation by Viracocha down to the time of the Incas. But it may be assumed that, although the land was peopled and full of inhabitants before the Incas, it had no regular government, nor did it have natural lords elected by common consent to govern and rule, and who were respected by the people, so that they were obeyed and received tribute. On the contrary all the people were scattered and disorganized, living in complete liberty, and each man being sole lord of his house and estate. In each tribe there were two divisions. One was called Hanansaya, which means the upper division, and the other Hurinsaya, which is the lower division, a custom which continues to this day. These divisions do not mean anything more than a way to count each other, for their satisfaction; though afterwards it served a more useful purpose, as will be seen in its place.

As there were dissensions among them, a certain kind of militia was organized for defence, in the following way. When it became known to the people of one district that some from other parts were coming to make war, they chose one who was a native, or he might be a stranger, who was known to be a valiant warrior. Often such a man offered himself to aid and to fight for them against their enemies. Such a man was followed and

his orders were obeyed during the war. When the war was over he became a private man as he had been before, like the rest of the people, nor did they pay him tribute either before or afterwards, nor any manner of tax whatever. To such a man they gave and still give the name of Sinchi which means valiant. They call such men "Sinchi-cuna" which means "valiant now" as who should say--"now during the time the war lasts you shall be our valiant man, and afterwards no": or another meaning would be simply "valiant men," for "cuna" is an adverb of time, and also denotes the plural. In whichever meaning, it is very applicable to these temporary captains in the days of general liberty. So that from the general flood of which they have a tradition to the time when the Incas began to reign, which was 3519 years, all the natives of these kingdoms lived on their properties without acknowledging either a natural or an elected lord. They succeeded in preserving, as it is said, a simple state of liberty, living in huts or caves or humble little houses. This name of Sinchi for those who held sway only during war, lasted throughout the land until the time of Tupac Inca Yupanqui, the tenth Inca, who instituted Curacas and other officials in the order which will be fully described in the life of that Inca. Even at the present time they continue this use and custom in the provinces of Chile and in other parts of the forests of Peru to the east of Quito and Chachapoyas, where they only obey a chief during war time, not any special one, but he who is known to be most valiant, enterprising and daring in the wars. The reader should note that all the land was private property with reference to any dominion of chiefs, yet they had natural chiefs with special rights in each province, as for instance among the natives of the valley of Cuzco and in other parts, as we shall relate of each part in its place.

HOW THE INCAS BEGAN TO TYRANNIZE OVER THE LANDS AND INHERITANCES

Having explained that, in ancient times, all this land was owned by the people, it is necessary to state how the Incas began their tyranny. Although the tribes all lived in simple liberty without recognising any lord, there were always some ambitious men among them, aspiring for mastery. They committed violence among their countrymen and among strangers to subject them and bring them to obedience under their command, so that they might serve them and pay tribute. Thus bands of men belonging to one region went to others to make war and to rob and kill, usurping the lands of others.

As these movements took place in many parts by many tribes, each one trying to subjugate his neighbour, it happened that 6 leagues from the valley of Cuzco, at a place called Paccari-tampu, there were four men with their four sisters, of fierce courage and evil intentions, although with lofty aims. These, being more able than the others, understood the pusillanimity of the natives of those districts and the ease with which they could be made to believe anything that was propounded with authority or with any force. So they conceived among themselves the idea of being able to subjugate many lands by force and deception. Thus all the eight brethren, four men and four women, consulted together how they could tyrannize over other tribes beyond the place where they lived, and they proposed to do this by violence. Considering that most of the natives were ignorant and could easily be made to believe what was said to them, particularly if they were addressed with some roughness, rigour and authority, against which they could make neither reply nor resistance because they are timid by nature, they sent abroad certain fables respecting their origin, that they might be respected and feared. They said that they were the sons of Viracocha Pachayachachi, the Creator, and that they had come forth out of certain windows to rule the rest of the people. As they were fierce, they made the people believe and fear them, and hold them to be more than men, even worshipping them as gods. Thus they introduced the religion that suited them. The order of the fable they told of their origin was as follows.
THE FABLE OF THE ORIGIN OF THE INCAS OF CUZCO

All the native Indians of this land relate and affirm that the Incas Ccapac originated in this way. Six leagues S.S.W. of Cuzco by the road which the Incas made, there is a place called Paccari-tampu, at which there is a hill called Tampu-tocco, meaning "the house of windows." It is certain that in this hill there are three windows, one called "Maras-tocco," the other "Sutic-tocco," while that which is in the middle, between these two, was known as "Ccapac-tocco," which means "the rich window," because they say that it was ornamented with gold and other treasures. From the window called "Maras-tocco" came forth, without parentage, a tribe of Indians called Maras. There are still some of them in Cuzco. From the "Sutic-tocco" came Indians called Tampus, who settled round the same hill, and there are also men of this lineage still in Cuzco. From the chief window of "Ccapac-tocco," came four men and four women, called brethren. These knew no father nor mother, beyond the story they told that they were created and came out of the said window by order of Ticci Viracocha, and they declared that Viracocha created them to be lords. For this reason they took the name of Inca, which is the same as lord. They took "Ccapac" as an additional name because they came out of the window "Ccapac-tocco," which means "rich," although afterwards they used this term to denote the chief lord over many.

The names of the eight brethren were as follows: The eldest of the men, and the one with the most authority was named Manco Ccapac, the second Ayar Auca, the third Ayar Cachi, the fourth Ayar Uchu. Of the women the eldest was called Mama Occlo, the second Mama Huaco, the third Mama Ipacura, or, as others say, Mama Cura, the fourth Mama Raua.

The eight brethren, called Incas, said--"We are born strong and wise, and with the people who will here join us, we shall be powerful. We will go forth from this place to seek fertile lands and when we find them we will subjugate the people and take the lands, making war on all those who do not receive us as their lords." This, as they relate, was said by Mama Huaco, one of the women, who was fierce and cruel. Manco Ccapac, her brother, was also cruel and atrocious. This being agreed upon between the eight, they began to move the people who lived near the hill, putting it to them that their reward would be to become rich and to receive the lands and estates of those who were conquered and subjugated. For these objects they moved ten tribes or ayllus, which means among these barbarians "lineages" or "parties"; the names of which are as follows:

I. Chauin Cuzco Ayllu of the lineage of Ayar Cachi, of which there are still some in Cuzco, the chiefs being Martin Chucumbi, and Don Diego Huaman Paucar.

II. Arayraca Ayllu Cuzco-Callan. At present there are of this ayllu Juan Pizarro Yupanqui, Don Francisco Quispi, Alonso Tarma Yupanqui of the lineage of Ayar Uchu.

III. Tarpuntay Ayllu. Of this there are now some in Cuzco.

IV. Huacaytaqui Ayllu. Some still living in Cuzco.

V. Sañoc Ayllu. Some still in Cuzco. The above five lineages are Hanan-Cuzco, which means the party of Upper Cuzco.

VI. Sutic-Tocco Ayllu is the lineage which came out of one of the windows called "Sutic-Tocco," as has been before explained. Of these there are still some in Cuzco, the chiefs being Don Francisco Avca Micho Avri Sutic, and Don Alonso Hualpa.

VII. Maras Ayllu. These are of the men who came forth from the window "Maras-Tocco." There are some of these now in Cuzco, the chiefs being Don Alonso Llama Oca, and Don Gonzalo Ampura Llama Oca.

VIII. Cuycusa Ayllu. Of these there are still some in Cuzco, the chief being Cristoval Acllari.

IX. Masca Ayllu. Of this there is in Cuzco, Juan Quispi.

X. Oro Ayllu. Of this lineage is Don Pedro Yucay.

I say that all these ayllus have preserved their records in such a way that the memory of them has not been lost. There are more of them than are given above, for I only insert the chiefs who are the protectors and heads of the lineages, under whose guidance they are preserved. Each chief has the duty and obligation to protect the rest, and to know the history of his ancestors. Although I say that these live in Cuzco, the truth is that they are in a suburb of the city which the Indians call Cayocache and which is known to us as Belem, from the church of that parish which is that of our Lady of Belem.

Returning to our subject, all these followers above-mentioned marched with Manco Ccapac and the other brethren to seek for land (and to tyrannize over those who did no harm to them, nor gave them any excuse for war, and without any right or title beyond what has been stated). To be prepared for war they chose for their leaders Manco Ccapac and Mama Huaco, and with this arrangement the companies of the hill of Tampu-tocco set out, to put their design into execution.

THE ROAD WHICH THESE COMPANIES OF THE INCAS TOOK TO THE VALLEY OF CUZCO, AND OF THE FABLES WHICH ARE MIXED WITH THEIR HISTORY

The Incas and the rest of the companies or ayllus set out from their homes at Tampu-tocco, taking with them their property and arms, in sufficient numbers to form a good squadron, having for their chiefs the said Manco Ccapac and Mama Huaco.

Manco Ccapac took with him a bird like a falcon, called indi, which they all worshipped and feared as a sacred, or, as some say, an enchanted thing, for they thought that this bird made Manco Ccapac their lord and obliged the people to follow him. It was thus that Manco Ccapac gave them to understand, and it was always kept in a covered hamper of straw, like a box, with much care. He left it as an heirloom to his son, and the Incas had it down to the time of Inca Yupanqui. In his hand he carried with him a staff of gold, to test the lands which they would come to.

Marching together they came to a place called Huanacancha, four leagues from the valley of Cuzco, where they remained for some time, sowing and seeking for fertile land. Here Manco Ccapac had connection with his sister Mama Occlo, and she became pregnant by him. As this place did not appear able to sustain them, being barren, they advanced to another place called Tampu-quiro, where Mama Occlo begot a son named Sinchi Rocca. Having celebrated the natal feasts of the infant, they set out in search of fertile land, and came to another place called Pallata, which is almost contiguous to Tampu-quiro, and there they remained for some years.

Not content with this land, they came to another called Hays-quisro, a quarter of a league further on. Here they consulted together over what ought to be done respecting their journey, and over the best way of getting rid of Ayar Cachi, one of the four brothers. Ayar Cachi was fierce and strong, and very dexterous with the sling. He committed great cruelties and was oppressive both among the natives of the places they passed, and among his own people. The other brothers were afraid that the conduct of Ayar Cachi would cause their companies to disband and desert, and that they would be left alone. As Manco Ccapac was prudent, he concurred with the opinion of the others that they should secure their object by deceit. They called Ayar Cachi and said to him, "Brother! Know that in Ccapac-tocco we have forgotten the golden vases called tupac-cusi, and certain seeds, and the napa, which is our principal ensign of sovereignty." The napa is a sheep of the country, the colour white, with a red body cloth, on the top ear-rings of gold, and on the breast a plate with red badges such as was worn by rich Incas when they went abroad; carried in front of all on a pole with a cross of plumes of feathers. This was called suntur-paucar. They said that it would be for the good of all, if he would go back and fetch them. When Ayar Cachi refused to return, his sister Mama Huaco, raising her foot, rebuked him with furious words, saying, "How is it that there should be such cowardice in so strong a youth as you are? Get ready for the journey, and do not fail to go to Tampu-tocco, and do what you are ordered." Ayar Cachi was shamed by these words. He obeyed and started to carry out his orders. They gave him, as a companion, one of those who had come with them, named Tampu-chacay, to whom they gave secret orders to kill Ayar Cachi at Tampu-tocco, and not to return with him. With these orders they both arrived at Tampu-tocco. They had scarcely arrived when Ayar Cachi entered through the window Ccapac-tocco, to get the things for which he had been sent. He was no sooner inside than Tampu-chacay, with great celerity, put a rock against the opening of the window and sat upon it, that Ayar Cachi might remain inside and die there. When Ayar Cachi turned to the opening and found it closed he understood the treason of which the traitor Tampu-chacay had been guilty, and determined to get out if it was possible, to take vengeance. To force an opening he used such force and shouted so loud that he made the mountain tremble. With a loud voice he spoke these words to Tampu-chacay, "Thou traitor! thou who hast done me so much harm, thinkest thou to convey the news of my mortal imprisonment? That shall, never happen. For thy treason thou shalt remain outside, turned into a stone." So it was done, and to this day they show the stone on one side of the window Ccapac-tocco. Turn we now to the seven brethren who had remained at Hays-quisro. The death of Ayar Cachi being known, they were very sorry for what they had done, for, as he was valiant, they regretted much to be without him when the time came to make war on any one. So they mourned for him. This Ayar Cachi was so dexterous with a sling and so strong that with each shot he pulled down a mountain and filled up a ravine. They say that the ravines, which we now see on their line of march, were made by Ayar Cachi in hurling stones.

The seven Incas and their companions left this place, and came to another called Quirirmanta at the foot of a hill which was afterwards called Huanacauri. In this place they consulted together how they should divide the duties of the enterprise amongst themselves, so that there should be distinctions between them. They agreed that as Manco Ccapac had had a child by his sister, they should be married and have children to continue the lineage, and that he should be the leader. Ayar Uchu was to remain as a huaca for the sake of religion. Ayar Auca, from the position they should select, was to take possession of the land set apart for him to people.

Leaving this place they came to a hill at a distance of two leagues, a little more or less, from Cuzco. Ascending the hill they saw a rainbow, which the natives call huanacauri. Holding it to be a fortunate sign, Manco Ccapac said: "Take this for a sign that the world will not be destroyed by water. We shall arrive and from hence we shall select where we shall found our city." Then, first casting lots, they saw that the signs were good for doing so, and for exploring the land from that point and becoming lords of it. Before they got to the height where the rainbow was, they saw a huaca which was a place of worship in human shape, near the rainbow. They determined among themselves to seize it and take it away from there. Ayar Uchu offered himself to go to it, for they said that he was very like it. When Ayar Uchu came to the statue or huaca, with great courage he sat upon it, asking it what it did there. At these words the huaca turned its head to see who spoke, but, owing to the weight upon it, it could not see. Presently, when Ayar Uchu wanted to get off he was not able, for he found that the soles of his feet were fastened to the shoulders of the huaca. The six brethren, seeing that he was a prisoner, came to succour him. But Ayar Uchu, finding himself thus transformed, and that his brethren could not release him, said to them--"O Brothers, an evil work you have wrought for me. It was for your sakes that I came where I must remain for ever, apart from your company. Go! go! happy brethren. I announce to you that you will be great lords. I, therefore, pray that in recognition of the desire I have always had to please you, you will honour and venerate me in all your festivals and ceremonies, and that I shall be the first to whom you make offerings. For I remain here for your sakes. When you celebrate the huarachico (which is the arming of the sons as knights) you shall adore me as their father, for I shall remain here for ever." Manco Ccapac answered that he would do so, for that it was his will and that it should be so ordered. Ayar Uchu promised for the youths that he would bestow on them the gifts of valour, nobility, and knighthood, and with these last words he remained, turned into stone. They constituted him the huaca of the Incas, giving it the name of Ayar Uchu Huanacauri. And so it always was, until the arrival of the Spaniards, the most venerated huaca, and the one that received the most offerings of any in the kingdom. Here the Incas went to arm the young knights until about twenty years ago, when the Christians abolished this ceremony. It was religiously done, because there were many abuses and idolatrous practices, offensive and contrary to the ordinances of God our Lord.
ENTRY OF THE INCAS INTO THE VALLEY OF CUZCO, AND THE FABLES THEY RELATE CONCERNING IT

The six brethren were sad at the loss of Ayar Uchu, and at the loss of Ayar Cachi; and, owing to the death of Ayar Cachi, those of the lineage of the Incas, from that time to this day, always fear to go to Tampu-tocco, lest they should have to remain there like Ayar Cachi.

They went down to the foot of the hill, whence they began their entry into the valley of Cuzco, arriving at a place called Matahua, where they stopped and built huts, intending to remain there some time. Here they armed as knight the son of Manco Ccapac and of Mama Occlo, named Sinchi Rocca, and they bored his ears, a ceremony which is called huarachico, being the insignia of his knighthood and nobility, like the custom known among ourselves. On this occasion they indulged in great rejoicings, drinking for many days, and at intervals mourning for the loss of their brother Ayar Uchu. It was here that they invented the mourning sound for the dead, like the cooing of a dove. Then they performed the dance called Ccapac Raymi, a ceremony of the royal or great lords. It is danced, in long purple robes, at the ceremonies they call quicochico, which is when girls come to maturity, and the huarachico, when they pierce the ears of the Incas, and the rutuchico, when the Inca's hair is cut the first time, and the ayuscay, which is when a child is born, and they drink continuously for four or five days.

After this they were in Matahua for two years, waiting to pass on to the upper valley to seek good and fertile land. Mama Huaco, who was very strong and dexterous, took two wands of gold and hurled them towards the north. One fell, at two shots of an arquebus, into a ploughed field called Colcapampa and did not drive in well, the soil being loose and not terraced. By this they knew that the soil was not fertile. The other went further, to near Cuzco, and fixed well in the territory called Huanay-pata, where they knew the land to be fertile. Others say that this proof was made by Manco Ccapac with the staff of gold which he carried himself, and that thus they knew of the fertility of the land, when the staff sunk in the land called Huanay-pata, two shots of an arquebus from Cuzco. They knew the crust of the soil to be rich and close, so that it could only be broken by using much force.

Let it be by one way or the other, for all agree that they went trying the land with a pole or staff until they arrived at this Huanay-pata, when they were satisfied. They were sure of its fertility, because after sowing perpetually, it always yielded abundantly, giving more the more it was sown. They determined to usurp that land by force, in spite of the natural owners, and to do with it as they chose. So they returned to Matahua.

From that place Manco Ccapac saw a heap of stones near the site of the present monastery of Santo Domingo at Cuzco. Pointing it out to his brother Ayar Auca, he said, "Brother! you remember how it was arranged between us, that you should go to take possession of the land where we are to settle. Well! look at that stone." Pointing out the stone he continued, "Go thither flying," for they say that Ayar Auca had developed some wings, "and seating yourself there, take possession of land seen from that heap of stones. We will presently come to settle and reside." When Ayar Auca heard the words of his brother, he opened his wings and flew to that place which Manco Ccapac had pointed out. Seating himself there, he was presently turned into stone, and was made the stone of possession. In the ancient language of this valley the heap was called cozco, whence that site has had the name of Cuzco to this day. From this circumstance the Incas had a proverb which said, "Ayar Auca cuzco huanca," or, "Ayar Auca a heap of marble." Others say that Manco Ccapac gave the name of Cuzco because he wept in that place where he buried his brother Ayar Cachi. Owing to his sorrow and to the fertility, he gave that name which in the ancient language of that time signified sad as well as fertile. The first version must be the correct one because Ayar Cachi was not buried at Cuzco, having died at Ccapac-tocco as has been narrated before. And this is generally affirmed by Incas and natives.

Five brethren only remaining, namely Manco Ccapac, and the four sisters, and Manco Ccapac being the only surviving brother out of four, they presently resolved to advance to where Ayar Auca had taken possession. Manco Ccapac first gave to his son Sinchi Rocca a wife named Mama Cuca, of the lineage of Sañu, daughter of a Sinchi named Sitic-huaman, by whom he afterwards had a son named Sapaca. He also instituted the sacrifice called capa cocha, which is the immolation of two male and two female infants before the idol Huanacauri, at the time when the Incas were armed as knights. These things being arranged, he ordered the companies to follow him to the place where Ayar Auca was.

Arriving on the land of Huanay-pata, which is near where now stands the Arco de la plata leading to the Charcas road, he found settled there a nation of Indians named Huallas, already mentioned. Manco Ccapac and Mama Occlo began to settle and to take possession of the land and water, against the will of the Huallas. In this business they did many violent and unjust things. As the Huallas attempted to defend their lives and properties, many cruelties were committed by Manco Ccapac and Mama Occlo. They relate that Mama Occlo was so fierce that, having killed one of the Hualla Indians, she cut him up, took out the inside, carried the heart and lungs in her mouth, and with an ayuinto, which is a stone fastened to a rope, in her hand, she attacked the Huallas with diabolical resolution. When the Huallas beheld this horrible and inhuman spectacle, they feared that the same things would be done to them, being simple and timid, and they fled and abandoned their rights. Mama Occlo reflecting on her cruelty, and fearing that for it they would be branded as tyrants, resolved not to spare any Huallas, believing that the affair would thus be forgotten. So they killed all they could lay their hands upon, dragging infants from their mothers' wombs, that no memory might be left of these miserable Huallas.

Having done this Manco Ccapac advanced, and came within a mile of Cuzco to the S. E., where a Sinchi named Copalimayta came out to oppose him. We have mentioned this chief before and that, although he was a late comer, he settled with the consent of the natives of the valley, and had been incorporated in the nation of Sauaseray Panaca, natives of the site of Santo Domingo at Cuzco. Having seen the strangers invading their lands and tyrannizing over them, and knowing the cruelties inflicted on the Huallas, they had chosen Copalimayta as their Sinchi. He came forth to resist the invasion, saying that the strangers should not enter his lands or those of the natives. His resistance was such that Manco Ccapac and his companions were obliged to turn their backs. They returned to Huanay-pata, the land they had usurped from the Huallas. From the sowing they had made they derived a fine crop of maize, and for this reason they gave the place a name which means something precious.

After some months they returned to the attack on the natives of the valley, to tyrannize over them. They assaulted the settlement of the Sauaseras, and were so rapid in their attack that they captured Copalimayta, slaughtering many of the Sauaseras with great cruelty. Copalimayta, finding himself a prisoner and fearing death, fled out of desperation, leaving his estates, and was never seen again after he escaped. Mama Huaco and Manco Ccapac usurped his houses, lands and people. In this way Manco Ccapac, Mama Huaco, Sinchi Rocca, and Manco Sapaca settled on the site between the two rivers, and erected the House of the Sun, which they called Ynti-cancha. They divided all that position, from Santo Domingo to the junction of the rivers into four neighbourhoods or quarters which they call cancha. They called one Quinti-cancha, the second Chumpi-cancha, the third Sayri-cancha, and the fourth Yarampuy-cancha. They divided the sites among themselves, and thus the city was peopled, and, from the heap of stones of Ayar Auca it was called Cuzco.

DEATH OF PACHACUTI INCA YUPANQUI
from "History of the Incas" by Pedro Sarmiento De Gamboa, translated by Clements Markham, Cambridge: The Hakluyt Society 1907, pp. 138-139.

BEING IN THE HIGHEST PROSPERITY and sovereignty of his life, he fell ill of a grave infirmity, and, feeling that he was at the point of death, he sent for all his sons who were then in the city. In their presence he first divided all his jewels and contents of his wardrobe. Next he made them plough furrows in token that they were vassals of their brother, and that they had to eat by the sweat of their hands. He also gave them arms in token that they were to fight for their brother. He then dismissed them.

He next sent for the Incas orejones of Cuzco, his relations, and for Tupac Inca his son to whom he spoke, with a few words, in this manner: "Son! you now see how many great nations I leave to you, and you know what labour they have cost me. Mind that you are the man to keep and augment them. No one must raise his two eyes against you and live, even if he be your own brother. I leave you these our relations that they may be your councillors. Care for them and they shall serve you. When I am dead, take care of my body, and put it in my houses at Patallacta. Have my golden image in the House of the Sun, and make my subjects, in all the provinces, offer up solemn sacrifice, after which keep the feast of purucaya, that I may go to rest with my father the Sun." Having finished his speech they say that he began to sing in a low and sad voice with words of his own language. They are as follows:

"I was born as a flower of the field,
As a flower I was cherished in my youth,
I came to my full age, I grew old,
Now I am withered and die."

Having uttered these words, he laid his head upon a pillow and expired, giving his soul to the devil, having lived a hundred and twenty-five years. For he succeeded, or rather he took the Incaship into his hands when he was twenty-two, and he was sovereign one hundred and three years.

Apu Ollantay

DRAMATIS PERSONAE

APU OLLANTAY.—General of Anti-suyu, the eastern province of the empire. A young chief, but not of the blood-royal. His rank was that of a Tucuyricuo or Viceroy. The name occurs among the witnesses examined by order of the Viceroy Toledo, being one of the six of the Antasayac ayllu.

PACHACUTI.—The Sovereign Inca.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.—Sovereign. Inca, son and heir of Pachacuti.

RUMI-ÑAUI.—A great chief, General of Colla-suyu. The word means ‘Stone-eye.’

UILLAC UMA.—High Priest of the Sun. The word Uma means head, and Uillac, a councillor and diviner.

URCO HUARANCA.—A chief. The words mean ‘Mountain Chief.’ The word huaranca means 1000; hence, Chief of a Thousand.

HANCO HUAYLLU AUQUI.—An old officer, of the blood-royal.

PIQUI CHAQUI.—Page to Ollantay. The words mean ‘fleet-footed.’

ANAHUARQUI.—The Ccoya or Queen, wife of Pachacuti.

CUSI COYLLUR ÑUSTA.—A Princess, daughter of Pachacuti. The words mean ‘the joyful star.’

YMA SUMAC.—Daughter of Cusi Coyllur. The words mean ‘How beautiful.’

PITU SALLA.—A girl, companion of Yma Sumac.

CCACCA MAMA.—A matron of Virgins of the Sun. Jailer of Cusi Coyllur.

Nobles, captains, soldiers, boys and girls dancing, singers, attendants, messengers or Chasqui.
ACT I
SCENE 1

An open space near the junction of the two torrents of Cuzco, the Huatanay and Tullumayu or Rodadero, called Pumap Chupan, just outside the gardens of the Sun. The Temple of the Sun beyond the gardens, and the Sacsahuaman hill surmounted by the fortress, rising in the distance. The palace of Colcampata on the hillside.

(Enter OLLANTAY L. [in a gilded tunic, breeches of llama sinews, usutas or shoes of llama hide, a red mantle of ccompi or fine cloth, and the chucu or head-dress of his rank, holding a battle-axe (champi) and club (macana)] and PIQUI CHAQUI coming up from the back R. [in a coarse brown tunic of auasca or llama cloth, girdle used as a sling, and chucu or head-dress of a Cuzqueño].)

OLLANTAY.
Where, young fleet-foot, hast thou been?
Hast thou the starry Ñusta seen?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
The Sun forbids such sacrilege
’Tis not for me to see the star.
Dost thou, my master, fear no ill,
Thine eyes upon the Inca’s child?

OLLANTAY.
In spite of all I swear to love
That tender dove, that lovely star;
My heart is as a lamb[6] with her,
And ever will her presence seek.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Such thoughts are prompted by Supay[7];
That evil being possesses thee.
All round are beauteous girls to choose
Before old age, and weakness come.
If the great Inca knew thy plot
And what thou seekest to attain,
Thy head would fall by his command,
Thy body would be quickly burnt.

OLLANTAY.
Boy, do not dare to cross me thus.
One more such word and thou shalt die.
These hands will tear thee limb from limb,
If still thy councils are so base.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Well! treat thy servant as a dog,
But do not night and day repeat,
‘Piqui Chaqui! swift of foot!
Go once more to seek the star.’

OLLANTAY.
Have I not already said
That e’en if death’s fell scythe[8] was here,
If mountains should oppose my path
Like two fierce foes[9] who block the way,
Yet will I fight all these combined
And risk all else to gain my end,
And whether it be life or death
I’ll cast myself at Coyllur’s feet.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
But if Supay himself should come?

OLLANTAY.
I’d strike the evil spirit down.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
If thou shouldst only see his nose,
Thou wouldst not speak as thou dost now.

OLLANTAY.
Now, Piqui Chaqui, speak the truth,
Seek not evasion or deceit.
Dost thou not already know,
Of all the flowers in the field,
Not one can equal my Princess?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Still, my master, thou dost rave.
I think I never saw thy love.
Stay! was it her who yesterday
Came forth with slow and faltering steps
And sought a solitary[10] path[11]?
If so, ’tis true she’s like the sun,
The moon less beauteous than her face.[12]

OLLANTAY.
It surely was my dearest love.
How beautiful, how bright is she
This very moment thou must go
And take my message to the Star.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
I dare not, master; in the day,
I fear to pass the palace gate.
With all the splendour of the court,
I could not tell her from the rest.

OLLANTAY.
Didst thou not say thou sawest her?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
I said so, but it was not sense.
A star can only shine at night
Only at night could I be sure.

OLLANTAY.
Begone, thou lazy good-for-nought.
The joyful star that I adore,
If placed in presence of the Sun,
Would shine as brightly as before.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Lo! some person hither comes,
Perhaps an old crone seeking alms;
Yes! Look! he quite resembles one.
Lot him the dangerous message take.
Send it by him, O noble Chief!
From me they would not hear the tale;
Thy page is but a humble lad.

(Enter the UILLAC UMA, or High Priest of the Sun, at the back, arms raised to the Sun. In a grey tunic and black mantle from the shoulders to the ground, a long knife in his belt, the undress chucu on his head.)

UILLAC UMA.
O giver of all warmth and light
O Sun! I fall and worship thee.
For thee the victims are prepared,
A thousand llamas and their lambs
Are ready for thy festal day.
The sacred fire’ll lap their blood,
In thy dread presence, mighty one,
After long fast[13] thy victims fall.

OLLANTAY.
Who comes hither, Piqui Chaqui?
Yes, ’tis the holy Uillac Uma;
He brings his tools of augury.
No puma[14] more astute and wise
I hate that ancient conjurer
Who prophesies of evil things,
I feel the evils he foretells;
’Tis he who ever brings ill-luck.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Silence, master, do not speak,
The old man doubly is informed;
Fore-knowing every word you say,
Already he has guessed it all.

(He lies down on a bank.)

OLLANTAY.
(aside)
He sees me. I must speak to him.

(The Uillac Uma comes forward.)

O Uillac Uma, Great High Priest,
I bow before thee with respect
May the skies be clear for thee,
And brightest sunshine meet thine eyes.

UILLAC UMA.
Brave Ollantay! Princely one!
May all the teeming land be thine;
May thy far-reaching arm of might
Reduce the wide-spread universe.

OLLANTAY.
Old man! thine aspect causes fear,
Thy presence here some ill forebodes;
All round thee dead men’s bones appear,
Baskets, flowers, sacrifice.
All men when they see thy face
Are filled with terror and alarm.
What means it all? why comest thou?
It wants some months before the least.
Is it that the Inca is ill?
Perchance hast thou some thought divined
Which soon will turn to flowing blood.
Why comest thou? the Sun’s great day,
The Moon’s libations are not yet
The moon has not yet nearly reached
The solemn time for sacrifice.
Uillac Uma. Why dost thou these questions put,
In tones of anger and reproach?
Am I, forsooth, thy humble slave?
That I know all I’ll quickly prove.

OLLANTAY.
My beating heart is filled with dread,
Beholding thee so suddenly;
Perchance thy coming is a sign,
Of evils overtaking me.

UILLAC UMA.
Fear not, Ollantay! not for that,
The High Priest comes to thee this day.
It is perhaps for love of thee,
That, as a straw is blown by wind,
A friend, this day, encounters thee.
Speak to me as to a friend,
Hide nothing from my scrutiny.
This day I come to offer thee
A last and most momentous choice
’Tis nothing less than life or death.

OLLANTAY.
Then make thy words more clear to me,
That I may understand the choice;
Till now ’tis but a tangled skein,
Unravel it that I may know.

UILLAC UMA.
’Tis well. Now listen, warlike. Chief:
My science has enabled me,
To learn and see all hidden things
Unknown to other mortal men.
My power will enable me
To make of thee a greater prince.
I brought thee up from tender years,
And cherished thee with love and care
I now would guide thee in the right,
And ward off all that threatens thee.
As chief of Anti-suyu now,
The people venerate thy name;
Thy Sovereign trusts and honours thee,
E’en to sharing half his realm.
From all the rest he chose thee out,
And placed all power in thy hands;
He made thy armies great and strong,
And strengthened thee against thy foes
How numerous soe’er they be,
They have been hunted down by thee.
Are these good reasons for thy wish,
To wound thy Sovereign to the heart?
His daughter is beloved by thee;
Thy passion thou wouldst fain indulge,
Lawless and forbidden though it be.
I call upon thee, stop in time,
Tear this folly from thy heart.
If thy passion is immense,
Still let honour hold its place.
You reel, you stagger on the brink
I’d snatch thee from the very edge.
Thou knowest well it cannot be,
The Inca never would consent.
If thou didst e’en propose it now,
He would be overcome with rage;
From favoured prince and trusted chief,
Thou wouldst descend to lowest rank.

OLLANTAY.
How is it that thou canst surely know
What still is hidden in my heart?
Her mother only knows my love,
Yet thou revealest all to me.

UILLAC UMA.
I read thy secret on the moon,
As if upon the Quipu knots;
And what thou wouldst most surely hide,
Is plain to me as all the rest.

OLLANTAY.
In my heart I had divined
That thou wouldst search me through and through
Thou knowest all, O Councillor,
And wilt thou now desert thy son?

UILLAC UMA.
How oft we mortals heedless drink,
A certain death from golden cup
Recall to mind how ills befall,
And that a stubborn heart ’s the cause.

OLLANTAY.
(kneeling).
Plunge that dagger in my breast,
Thou holdst it ready in thy belt;
Cut out my sad and broken heart
I ask the favour at thy feet.

UILLAC UMA.
(to Piqui Chaqui).
Gather me that flower, boy.

(Piqui Chaqui gives him a withered flower and lies down again, pretending to sleep.)

(To Ollantay).
Behold, it is quite dead and dry.
Once more behold! e’en now it weeps,
It weeps. The water flows from it.

(Water flows out of the flower.)

OLLANTAY.
More easy for the barren rocks
Or for sand to send forth water,
Than that I should cease to love
The fair princess, the joyful star.

UILLAC UMA.
Put a seed into the ground,
It multiplies a hundredfold;
The more thy crime shall grow and swell,
The greater far thy sudden fall.

OLLANTAY.
Once for all, I now confess
To thee, O great and mighty Priest;
Now learn my fault. To thee I speak,
Since thou hast torn it from my heart.
The lasso to tie me is long,
’Tis ready to twist round my throat
Yet its threads are woven with gold,
It avenges a brilliant crime.
Cusi Coyllur e’en now is my wife,
Already we’re bound and are one;
My blood now runs in her veins,
E’en now I am noble as she.
Her mother has knowledge of all,
The Queen can attest what I say;
Let me tell all this to the King,
I pray for thy help and advice.
I will speak without fear and with force,
He may perhaps give way to his rage
Yet he may consider my youth,
May remember the battles I’ve fought;
The record is carved on my club.

(Holds up his macana.)

He may think of his enemies crushed,
The thousands I’ve thrown at his feet.

UILLAC UMA.
Young Prince! thy words are too bold,
Thou hast twisted the thread of thy fate—
Beware, before ’tis too late;
Disentangle and weave it afresh,
Go alone to speak to the King,
Alone bear the blow that you seek;
Above all let thy words be but few,
And say them with deepest respect;
Be it life, be it death that you find,
I will never forget thee, my son.

(Walks up and exit.)

OLLANTAY.
Ollantay, thou art a man,
No place in thy heart for fear;
Cusi Coyllur, surround me with light.
Piqui Chaqui, where art thou?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
(jumping up).
I was asleep, my master,
And dreaming of evil things.

OLLANTAY.
Of what?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Of a fox with a rope round its neck.

OLLANTAY.
Sure enough, thou art the fox.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
It is true that my nose is growing finer,
And my ears a good deal longer.

OLLANTAY.
Come, lead me to the Coyllur.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
It is still daylight.

(Exeunt.)
SCENE 2

A great hall in the Colcampata, then the palace of the Queen or Ccoya Anahuarqui. In the centre of the back scene a doorway, and seen through it gardens with the snowy peak of Vilcanota in the distance. Walls covered with golden slabs. On either side of the doorway three recesses, with household gods in the shape of maize-cobs and llamas, and gold vases in them. On R. a golden tiana or throne. On L. two lower seats covered with cushions of fine woollen cloth.

(ANAHUARQUI, the Queen or Ccoya (in blue chucu, white cotton bodice, and red mantle secured by a golden topu or pin, set with emeralds, and a blue skirt), and the princess CUSI COYLLUR (in a chucu, with feathers of the tunqui, white bodice and skirt, and grey mantle with topu, set with pearls) discovered seated.)

ANAHUARQUI.
Since when art thou feeling so sad,
Cusi Coyllur! great Inti’s prunelle?[15]
Since when hast thou lost all thy joy,
Thy smile and thy once merry laugh?
Tears of grief now pour down my face,
As I watch and mourn over my child;
Thy grief makes me ready to die.
Thy union filled thee with joy,
Already you’re really his wife.
Is he not the man of thy choice?
O daughter, devotedly loved,
Why plunged in such terrible grief?

(Cusi Coyllur has had her face hidden in the pillows. She now rises to her feet, throwing up her arms.)

CUSI COYLLUR.
O my mother! O most gracious Queen!
How can my tears o’er cease to flow,
How can my bitter sighs surcease,
While the valiant Chief I worship
For many days and sleepless nights,
All heedless of my tender years,
Seems quite to have forgotten me?
He has turned his regard from his wife
And no longer seeks for his love.
O my mother! O most gracious Queen!
O my husband so beloved!
Since the day when I last saw my love
The moon has been hidden from view;
The sun shines no more as of old,
In rising it rolls among mist;
At night the stars are all dim,
All nature seems sad and distressed
The comet with fiery tail,
Announces my sorrow and grief
Surrounded by darkness and tears,
Evil auguries fill me with fears.
O my mother! O most gracious Queen!
O my husband so beloved!

ANAHUARQUI.
Compose thyself and dry thine eyes,
The King, thy father, has arrived.
Thou lovest Ollantay, my child?

(Enter the INCA PACHACUTI. On his head the mascapaycha, with the llautu or imperial fringe. A tunic of cotton embroidered with gold; on his breast the golden breastplate representing the sun, surrounded by the calendar of months. Round his waist the fourfold belt of tocapu. A crimson mantle of fine vicuna wool, fastened on his shoulders by golden puma’s heads. Shoes of cloth of gold. He sits down on the golden tiana.)

INCA PACHACUTI.
Cusi Coyllur! Star of joy,
Most lovely of my progeny!
Thou symbol of parental love—
Thy lips are like the huayruru.[16]
Rest upon thy father’s breast,
Repose, my child, within mine arms.

(Cusi Coyllur comes across. They embrace.)

Unwind thyself, my precious one,
A thread of gold within the woof.
All my happiness rests upon thee,
Thou art my greatest delight.
Thine eyes are lovely and bright,
As the rays of my father the Sun.
When thy lips are moving to speak,
When thine eyelids are raised with a smile,
The wide world is fairly entranced.
Thy breathing embalms the fresh air;
Without thee thy father would pine,
Life to him would be dreary and waste.
He seeks for thy happiness, child,
Thy welfare is ever his care.

(Cusi Coyllur throws herself at his feet.)

CUSI COYLLUR.
O father, thy kindness to me
I feel; and embracing thy knees
All the grief of thy daughter will cease,
At peace when protected by thee.

PACHACUTI.
How is this! my daughter before me
On knees at my feet, and in tears?
I fear some evil is near—
Such emotion must needs be explained.

CUSI COYLLUR.
The star does weep before Inti,
The limpid tears wash grief away.

PACHACUTI.
Rise, my beloved, my star,
Thy place is on thy dear father’s knee.

(Cusi Coyllur rises and sits on a stool by her father. An attendant approaches.)

ATTENDANT.
O King! thy servants come to please thee.

PACHACUTI.
Let them all enter.

(Boys and girls enter dancing. After the dance they sing a harvest song.)

Thou must not feed,
O Tuyallay,[17]
In Ñusta’s field,
O Tuyallay.
Thou must not rob,
O Tuyallay,
The harvest maize,
O Tuyallay.
The grains are white,
O Tuyallay,
So sweet for food,
O Tuyallay.
The fruit is sweet,
O Tuyallay,
The leaves are green
O Tuyallay;
But the trap is set,
O Tuyallay.
The lime is there,
O Tuyallay.
We’ll cut thy claws,
O Tuyallay,
To seize thee quick,
O Tuyallay.
Ask Piscaca,[18]
O Tuyallay,
Nailed on a branch,
O Tuyallay.
Where is her heart,
O Tuyallay?
Where her plumes,
O Tuyallay?
She is cut up,
O Tuyallay,
For stealing grain,
O Tuyallay.
See the fate,
O Tuyallay,
Of robber birds,
O Tuyallay.

PACHACUTI.
Cusi Coyllur, remain thou here,
Thy mother’s palace is thy home
Fail not to amuse thyself,
Surrounded by thy maiden friends.

(Exeunt the Inca Pachacuti, the Ccoya Anahuarqui, and attendants.)

CUSI COYLLUR.
I should better like a sadder song.
My dearest friends, the last you sang
To me foreshadowed evil things;[19]
You who sang it leave me now.

(Exeunt boys and girls, except one girl who sings.)

Two loving birds are in despair,[20]
    They moan, they weep, they sigh;
For snow has fallen on the pair,
    To hollow tree they fly.

But lo! one dove is left alone
    And mourns her cruel fate;
She makes a sad and piteous moan,
    Alone without a mate.

She fears her friend is dead and gone—
    Confirmed in her belief,
Her sorrow finds relief in song,
    And thus she tells her grief.

‘Sweet mate! Alas, where art thou now?
    I miss thine eyes so bright,
Thy feet upon the tender bough,
    Thy breast so pure and bright.’

She wanders forth from stone to stone,
    She seeks her mate in vain;
‘My love! my love!’ she makes her moan,
    She falls, she dies in pain.

CUSI COYLLUR.
That yarahui is too sad,
Leave me alone.

(Exit the girl who sang the yarahui.)

Now my tears can freely flow.
SCENE 3

Great hall in the palace of Pachacuti. The INCA, as before, discovered seated on a golden tiana L. Enter to him R. OLLANTAY and RUMI-ÑAUI.

PACHACUTI.
The time has arrived, O great Chiefs,
To decide on the coming campaign.
The spring is approaching us now,
And our army must start for the war.
To the province of Colla[21] we march—
There is news of Chayanta’s[22] advance.
The enemies muster in strength,
They sharpen their arrows and spears.

OLLANTAY.
O King, that wild rabble untaught
Can never resist thine array;
Cuzco alone with its height
Is a barrier that cannot be stormed.
Twenty four thousand of mine,
With their champis[23] selected with care,
Impatiently wait for the sign,
The sound of the beat of my drums,[24]
The strains of my clarion and fife.

PACHACUTI.
Strive then to stir them to fight,
Arouse them to join in the fray,
Lest some should desire to yield,
To escape the effusion of blood.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
The enemies gather in force,
The Yuncas[25] are called to their aid;
They have put on their garbs for the war,
And have stopped up the principal roads.
All this is to hide their defects—
The men of Chayanta are base.
We hear they’re destroying the roads,
But we can force open the way;
Our llamas are laden with food—
We are ready to traverse the wilds.

PACHACUTI.
Are you really ready to start
To punish those angry snakes?
But first you must give them a chance
To surrender, retiring in peace,
So that blood may not flow without cause,
That no deaths of my soldiers befall.

OLLANTAY.
I am ready to march with my men,
Every detail prepared and in place,
But alas! I am heavy with care,
Almost mad with anxious suspense.

PACHACUTI.
Speak, Ollantay. Tell thy wish—
’Tis granted, e’en my royal fringe.

OLLANTAY.
Hear me in secret, O King.

PACHACUTI.
(to Rumi-ñaui).
Noble Chief of Colla, retire;
Seek repose in thy house for a time.
I will call thee before very long,
Having need of thy valour and skill.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
With respect I obey thy command.

(Exit Rumi-ñaui.)

OLLANTAY.
Thou knowest, O most gracious Lord,
That I have served thee from a youth,
Have worked with fortitude and truth,
Thy treasured praise was my reward.[26]

All dangers I have gladly met,
For thee I always watched by night,
For thee was forward in the fight,
My forehead ever bathed in sweat.

For thee I’ve been a savage foe,
Urging my Antis[27] not to spare,
But kill and fill the land with fear,
And make the blood of conquered flow.

My name is as a dreaded rope,[28]
I’ve made the hardy Yuncas[29] yield,
By me the fate of Chancas[30] sealed,
They are thy thralls without a hope.

’Twas I who struck the fatal blow,
When warlike Huancavilca[31] rose,
Disturbing thy august repose,
And laid the mighty traitor low.

Ollantay ever led the van,
Wherever men were doomed to die;
When stubborn foes were forced to fly,
Ollantay ever was the man.

Now every tribe bows down to thee—
Some nations peacefully were led,
Those that resist their blood is shed—
But all, O King, was due to me.

O Sovereign Inca, great and brave,
Rewards I know were also mine,
My gratitude and thanks are thine,
To me the golden axe you gave.

Inca! thou gavest me command
And rule o’er all the Anti race,
To me they ever yield with grace,
And thine, great King, is all their land

My deeds, my merits are thine own
To thee alone my work is due.
For one more favour I would sue,
My faithful service—thy renown.

(Ollantay kneels before the Inca.)

Thy thrall: I bow to thy behest,
Thy fiat now will seal my fate.
O King, my services are great,
I pray thee grant one last request.

I ask for Cusi Coyllur’s hand
If the Ñusta’s[32] love I’ve won.
O King! you’ll have a faithful son,
Fearless, well tried, at thy command.

PACHACUTI.
Ollantay, thou dost now presume.
Thou art a subject, nothing more.
Remember, bold one, who thou art,
And learn to keep thy proper place.

OLLANTAY.
Strike me to the heart.

PACHACUTI.
’Tis for me to see to that,
And not for thee to choose.
Thy presumption is absurd. Be gone!

(Ollantay rises and exit R.)
SCENE 4

A rocky height above Cuzco to the NE. Distant view of the city of Cuzco and of the Sacsahuaman hill, crowned by the fortress.

(Enter OLLANTAY armed.)

OLLANTAY.
Alas, Ollantay! Ollantay!
Thou master of so many lands,
Insulted by him thou servedst well.
O my thrice-beloved Coyllur,
Thee too I shall lose for ever.
O the void[33] within my heart,
O my princess! O precious dove!
Cuzco! O thou beautiful city!
Henceforth behold thine enemy.
I’ll bare thy breast to stab thy heart,
And throw it as food for condors;
Thy cruel Inca I will slay.
I will call my men in thousands,
The Antis will be assembled,
Collected as with a lasso.
All will be trained, all fully armed,
I will guide them to Sacsahuaman.
They will be as a cloud of curses,
When flames rise to the heavens.
Cuzco shall sleep on a bloody couch,
The King shall perish in its fall;
Then shall my insulter see
How numerous are my followers.
When thou, proud King, art at my feet,
We then shall see if thou wilt say,
‘Thou art too base for Coyllur’s hand.’
Not then will I bow down and ask,
For I, not thou, will be the King—
Yet, until then, let prudence rule.

(Enter PIQUI CHAQUI from back, R.)

Piqui Chaqui, go back with speed,
Tell the Princess I come to-night.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
I have only just come from there—
The palace was deserted quite,
No soul to tell me what had passed,
Not even a dog[34] was there.
All the doors were closed and fastened,
Except the principal doorway,
And that was left without a guard.

OLLANTAY.
And the servants?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Even the mice had fled and gone,
For nothing had been left to eat.
Only an owl was brooding there,
Uttering its cry of evil omen.

OLLANTAY.
Perhaps then her father has taken her,
To hide her in his palace bounds.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
The Inca may have strangled her;
Her mother too has disappeared.

OLLANTAY.
Did no one ask for me
Before you went away?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Near a thousand men are seeking
For you, and all are enemies,
Armed with their miserable clubs.

OLLANTAY.
If they all arose against me,
With this arm I’d fight them all
No one yet has beat this hand,
Wielding the champi sharp and true.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
I too would like to give a stroke
At least, if my enemy was unarmed.

OLLANTAY.
To whom?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
I mean that Urco Huaranca chief,
Who lately was in search of thee.

OLLANTAY.
Perhaps the Inca sends him here
If so my anger is aroused.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Not from the King, I am assured,
He cometh of his own accord
And yet he is an ignoble man.

OLLANTAY.
He has left Cuzco, I believe;
My own heart tells me it is so
I’m sure that owl announces it.
We’ll take to the hills, at once.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
But wilt thou abandon the Star?

OLLANTAY.
What can I do, alas!
Since she has disappeared?
Alas, my dove! my sweet princess.

(Music heard among the rocks.)

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Listen to that yarahui,
The sound comes from somewhere near.

(They sit on rocks.)

SONG

In a moment I lost my beloved,
    She was gone, and I never knew where;
I sought her in fields and in woods,
    Asking all if they’d seen the Coyllur.

Her face was so lovely and fair,
    They called her the beautiful Star.
No one else can be taken for her,
    With her beauty no girl can compare.

Both the sun and the moon seem to shine,
    Resplendent they shine from a height,
Their rays to her beauty resign
    Their brilliant light with delight.

Her hair is a soft raven black,
    Her tresses are bound with gold thread,
They fall in long folds down her back,
    And add charm to her beautiful head.

Her eyelashes brighten her face,
    Two rainbows less brilliant and fair,
Her eyes full of mercy and grace,
    With nought but two, suns can compare.

The eyelids with arrows concealed,
    Gaily shoot their rays into the heart
They open, lo! beauty revealed,
    Pierces through like a glittering dart.

Her cheeks Achancara[35] on snow,
    Her face more fair than the dawn,
From her mouth the laughter doth flow,
    Between pearls as bright as the morn.

Smooth as crystal and spotlessly clear
    Is her throat, like the corn in a sheaf
Her bosoms, which scarcely appear,
    Like flowers concealed by a leaf.

Her beautiful hand is a sight,
    As it rests from all dangers secure,
Her fingers transparently white,
    Like icicles spotless and pure.

OLLANTAY.
(rising).
That singer, unseen and unknown,
Has declared Coyllur’s beauty and grace;
He should fly hence, where grief overwhelms.
O Princess! O loveliest Star,
I alone am the cause of thy death,
I also should die with my love.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Perhaps thy star has passed away,
For the heavens are sombre and grey.

OLLANTAY.
When they know that their Chief has fled,
My people will rise at my call,
They will leave the tyrant in crowds
And he will be nearly alone.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Thou hast love and affection from men,
For thy kindness endears thee to all,
For thy hand’s always open with gifts,
And is closely shut only to me.

OLLANTAY.
Of what hast thou need?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
What? the means to got this and that,
To offer a gift to my girl,
To let others see what I have,
So that I may be held in esteem.

OLLANTAY.
Be as brave as thou art covetous,
And all the world will fear thee.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
My face is not suited for that;
Always gay and ready to laugh,
My features are not shaped that way.
To look brave! not becoming to me.
What clarions sound on the hills?
It quickly cometh near to us.

(Both look out at different sides.)

OLLANTAY.
I doubt not those who seek me—come,
Let us depart and quickly march.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
When flight is the word, I am here.

(Exeunt.)
SCENE 5

The great hall of the palace of Pachacuti. The INCA, as before, seated on the tiana. Enter to him RUMI-ÑAUI.

PACHACUTI.
I ordered a search to be made,
But Ollantay was not to be found.
My rage I can scarcely control—
Hast thou found this infamous wretch?

RUMI-ÑAUI.
His fear makes him hide from thy wrath.

PACHACUTI.
Take a thousand men fully armed,
And at once commence the pursuit.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Who can tell what direction to take?
Three days have gone by since his flight,
Perchance he’s concealed in some house,
And till now he is there, safely hid.

(Enter a chasqui or messenger with quipus.)

Behold, O King, a messenger
From Urubamba he has come.

CHASQUI.
I was ordered to come to my King,
Swift as the wind, and behold me.

PACHACUTI.
What news bringest thou?

CHASQUI.
This quipu will tell thee, O King.

PACHACUTI.
Examine it, O Rumi-ñaui.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Behold the llanta, and the knots[36]
Announce the number of his men.

PACHACUTI.
(to Chasqui).
And thou, what hast thou seen?

CHASQUI.
’Tis said that all the Anti host
Received Ollantay with acclaim;
Many have seen, and they recount,
Ollantay wears the royal fringe.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
The quipu record says the same.

PACHACUTI.
Scarcely can I restrain my rage!
Brave chief, commence thy march at once,
Before the traitor gathers strength.
If thy force is not enough,
Add fifty thousand men of mine.
Advance at once with lightning speed,
And halt not till the foe is reached.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
To-morrow sees me on the route,
I go to call the troops at once
The rebels on the Colla road,
I drive them flying down the rocks.
Thine enemy I bring to thee,
Dead or alive, Ollantay falls.
Meanwhile, O Inca, mighty Lord,
Rest and rely upon thy thrall.

(Exeunt.)

END OF ACT I.
ACT II
SCENE 1

Ollantay-tampu. Hall of the fortress-palace. Back scene seven immense stone, slabs, resting on them a monolith right across. Above masonry. At sides masonry with recesses; in the R. centre a great doorway. A golden tiana against the central slab.

(Enter OLLANTAY and URCO HUARANCA, both fully armed.)

URCO HUARANCA.
Ollantay, thou hast been proclaimed
By all the Antis as their Lord.
The women weep, as you will see—
They lose their husbands and their sons,
Ordered to the Chayanta war.
When will there be a final stop
To distant wars? Year after year
They send us all to far-off lands,
Where blood is made to flow like rain.
The King himself is well supplied
With coca and all kinds of food.
What cares he that his people starve?
Crossing the wilds our llamas die,
Our feet are wounded by the thorns,
And if we would not die of thirst
We carry water on our backs.

OLLANTAY.
Gallant friends! Ye hear those words,
Ye listen to the mountain chief.
Filled with compassion for my men,
I thus, with sore and heavy heart,
Have spoken to the cruel king:
‘The Anti-suyu must have rest;
All her best men shan’t die for thee,
By battle, fire, and disease—
They die in numbers terrible.
How many men have ne’er returned,
How many chiefs have met their death
For enterprises far away?’
For this I left the Inca’s court,[37]
Saying that we must rest in peace;
Lot none of us forsake our hearths,
And if the Inca still persists,
Proclaim with him a mortal feud.

(Enter HANCO HUAYLLU, several chiefs, and a great crowd of soldiers and people.)

PEOPLE.
Long live our king, Ollantay
Bring forth the standard and the fringe,
Invest him with the crimson fringe
In Tampu now the Inca reigns,
He rises like the star of day.

(The chiefs, soldiers, and people range them selves round. Ollantay is seated on the tiana by Hanco Huayllu, an aged Auqui or Prince.)

HANCO HUAYLLU.
Receive from me the royal fringe,
’Tis given by the people’s will.
Uilcanota[38] is a distant land,
Yet, even now, her people come
To range themselves beneath thy law.

(Ollantay is invested with the fringe. He rises.)

OLLANTAY.
Urco Huaranca, thee I name
Of Anti-suyu Chief and Lord;
Receive the arrows and the plume,

(Gives them.)

Henceforth thou art our general.

PEOPLE.
Long life to the Mountain Chief.

OLLANTAY.
Hanco Huayllu,[39] of all my lords
Thou art most venerable and wise,
Being kin to the august High Priest,
It is my wish that thou shouldst give
The ring unto the Mountain Chief.

(Urco Huaranca kneels, and Hanco Huayllu addresses him.)

HANCO HUAYLLU.
This ring around thy finger’s placed
That thou mayst feel, and ne’er forget,
That when in fight thou art engaged,
Clemency becomes a hero chief.

URCO HUARANCA.
A thousand times, illustrious king,
I bless thee for thy trust in me.

HANCO HUAYLLU.
Behold the valiant Mountain Chief,
Now fully armed from head to foot,
And bristling like the quiscahuan,[40]
Accoutred as becomes a knight.

(Turning to Urco Huaranca.)

Ne’er let thine enemies take thee in rear
Man of the Puna,[41] it ne’er can be said
You fled or trembled as a reed.

URCO HUARANCA.
Hear me, warriors of the Andes!
Already we have a valiant king,
It might be he will be attacked;
’Tis said th’ old Inca sends a force,
The men of Cuzco now advance.
We have not a single day to lose;
Call from the heights our Puna men,
Prepare their arms without delay,
Make Tampu strong with rampart walls,
No outlet leave without a guard;
On hill slopes gather pois’nous herbs
To shoot our arrows, carrying death.

OLLANTAY.
(to Urco Huaranca).
Select the chiefs!
Fix all the posts for different tribes;
Our foes keep marching without sleep—
Contrive to check them by surprise.
The compi[42] ruse may cause their flight.

URCO HUARANCA.
Thirty thousand brave Antis are here,
Amongst them no weakling is found;
Apu Maruti,[43] the mighty in war,
From high Uilcapampa[44] will come,
On steep Tinquiqueru[45] he’ll stand
To march when the signal appears;
On the opposite side of the stream
Prince Chara[46] has mustered his force;
In the gorge Charamuni[47] I post
Ten thousand armed Antis on watch;
Another such force is in wait
On the left, in the vale of Pachar.[48]
We are ready to meet our foes,
We await them with resolute calm;
They will march in their confident pride
Until their retreat is cut off,
Then the trumpet of war shall resound,
From the mountains the stones shall pour down,
Great blocks will be hurled from above.
The Huancas[49] are crushed or dispersed,
Then the knife shall do its fell work,
All will perish by blows from our hands,
Our arrows will follow their flight.

PEOPLE and SOLDIERS.
It is well! It is very well!

(Cheers and martial music.)

(Exeunt.)
SCENE 2

A wild place the mountains. Distant view of Ollantay-tampu.

(Enter Rumi-ñaui, torn and ragged, and covered with blood, with two attendants.)

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Ah! Rumi-ñaui—Rumi-ñaui,[50]
Thou art a fated rolling stone,[51]
Escaped indeed, but quite alone,
And this is now thy yarahui.

Ollantay posted on the height,
Thou couldst not either fight or see,
Thy men did quickly fall or flee;
No room was there to move or fight.

Thou knowest now thy heart did beat
And flutter like a butterfly;
Thy skill thou couldst not then apply,
No course was left thee but retreat.

They had recourse to a surprise,
Our warriors immolated quite.
Ah! that alone could turn thee white—
From shame like that, canst e’er arise?

By thousands did thy warriors fall,
I hardly could alone escape,
With open mouth fell death did gape,
A great disaster did befall.

Holding that traitor to be brave,
I sought to meet him face to face—
Rushing to seek him with my mace,
I nearly found a warrior’s grave.

My army then was near the hill,
When suddenly the massive stones
Came crashing down, with cries and moans,
While clarions sounded loud and shrill.

A rain of stones both great and small
Down on the crowd of warriors crashed,
On every side destruction flashed,
Thy heart the slaughter did appal.

Like a strong flood the blood did flow,
Inundating the ravine;
So sad a sight thou ne’er hast seen—
No man survived to strike a blow.

O thou who art by this disgraced,
What figure canst thou ever show
Before the king, who seeks to know
The truth, which must be faced?

’Tis better far myself to kill,
Or losing every scrap of hope,
To hang my body with this rope.

(Takes a sling off his cap—going.)

Yet may it not be useful still?

(Turns again.)

When bold Ollantay’s end has come.[52]

(Exit.)
SCENE 3

A garden in the house of the Virgins of the Sun. Chilca shrubs and mulli trees (Schinus Molle) with panicles of red berries. The walls of the house at the back, with a door. A gate (L.) opening on the street.

(YMA SUMAC discovered at the gate looking out. To her enters (R.) PITU SALLA. Both dressed in white with golden belts.)

PITU SALLA.
Yma Sumac, do not approach
So near that gate, and so often;
It might arouse the Mother’s wrath.
Thy name, which is so dear to me,
Will surely pass from mouth to mouth.
Honour shall be shown to chosen ones,[53]
Who wish to close the outer gate.
Amuse thyself within the walls,
And no one then can say a word.
Think well what you can find within—
It gives you all you can desire,
Of dresses, gold, and dainty food.
Thou art beloved by every one,
E’en Virgins of the royal blood.
The Mothers love to carry thee,
They give thee kisses and caress—
You they prefer to all the rest.
What more could any one desire,
Than always to remain with them,
Destined to be servant of the Sun?
In contemplating Him there’s peace.

YMA SUMAC.
Pitu Salla, ever you repeat
The same thing and the same advice;
I will open to thee my whole heart,
And say exactly what I think.
Know that to me this court and house
Are insupportable—no less;
The place oppresses—frightens me—
Each day I curse my destiny.
The faces of all the Mama Cuna
Fill me with hatred and disgust,
And from the place they make me sit,
Nothing else is visible.
Around me there is nothing bright,
All are weeping and ne’er cease
If I could ever have my way,
No person should remain within.
I see the people pass outside,
Laughing as they walk along.
The reason it is plain to see—
They are not mewed and cloistered here.
Is it because I have no mother,
That I am kept a prisoner?
Or is it I’m a rich novice?
Then from to-day I would be poor.
Last night I could not get to sleep,
I wandered down a garden walk;
In the dead silence of the night,
I heard one mourn. A bitter cry,
As one who sought and prayed for death.
On every side I looked about,
My hair almost on end with fright,
Trembling, I cried, ‘Who canst thou be?’
Then the voice murmured these sad words:
‘O Sun, release me from this place!’
And this, amidst such sighs and groans!
I searched about, but nothing found—
The grass was rustling in the wind.
I joined my tears to that sad sound,
My heart was torn with trembling fear.
When now the recollection comes,
I’m filled with sorrow and with dread.
You know now why I hate this place.
Speak no more, my dearest friend,
Of reasons for remaining here.

PITU SALLA.
At least go in. The Mother may appear.

YMA SUMAC.
But pleasant is the light of day.

(Exit, R.)

(Enter MAMA CCACCA, L., in grey with black edges and belt.)

MAMA CCACCA.
Pitu Salla, hast thou spoken
All I told thee to that child?

PITU SALLA.
I have said all to her.

MAMA CCACCA.
And she, does she answer freely?

PITU SALLA.
She has wept and asked for pity,
Refusing to comply at all.
She will not take the virgin’s oath.

MAMA CCACCA.
And this in spite of thy advice?

PITU SALLA.
I showed her the dress she will wear,
Telling her misfortune would befall
If she refused to be a chosen one—
That she would ever be an outcast,
And for us a child accursed.

MAMA CCACCA.
What can she imagine,
Wretched child of an unknown father,
A maid without a mother,
Just a fluttering butterfly?
Tell her plainly, very plainly,
That these walls offer her a home,
Suited for outcasts such as she,
And here no light is seen.

(Exit, L.)

PITU SALLA.
Ay, my Sumac! Yma Sumac!
These walls will be cruel indeed,
To hide thy surpassing beauty.

(Glancing to where Mama Ccacca went out.)

What a serpent! What a puma!
ACT III
SCENE 1

The Pampa Moroni, a street in Cuzco. Enter RUMI-ÑAUI (L.)[54] in a long black cloak with a train, and PIQUI CHAQUI (R.), meeting each other.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Whence, Piqui Chaqui, comest thou?
Dost thou here seek Ollantay’s fate?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Cuzco, great lord, is my birthplace;
I hasten back unto my home.
I care not more to pass my days
In dismal and profound ravines.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Tell me, Ollantay—what does he?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
He is busy now entangling
An already entangled skein.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
What skein?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Should you not give me some present
If you want me to talk to you.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
With a stick will I give thee blows,
With a rope I will hang thee.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
O, do not frighten me!

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Speak then.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Ollantay. Is it Ollantay?
I can remember no more.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Piqui Chaqui! Take care!

PIQUI CHAQUI.
But you will not listen!
I am turning blind,
My ears are getting deaf,
My grandmother is dead,
My mother is left alone.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Where is Ollantay? Tell me.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
I am in want of bread,
And the Paccays[55] are not ripe.
I have a long journey to-day—
The desert is very far off.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
If you continue to vex me
I will take your life.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Ollantay, is it? He is at work.
Ollantay! He is building a wall,
With very small stones indeed;
They are brought by little dwarfs—
So small that to be a man’s size
They have to climb on each other’s backs.
But tell me, O friend of the King,[56]
Why art thou in such long clothes,
Trailing like the wings of a sick bird[57]—
As they are black it is better.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Hast thou not seen already
That Cuzco is plunged in grief?
The great Inca Pachacuti[58] is dead,
All the people are in mourning,
Every soul is shedding tears.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Who, then, succeeds to the place
Which Pachacuti has left vacant?
If Tupac Yupanqui succeeds,
That Prince is the youngest
There are some others older.[59]

RUMI-ÑAUI.
All Cuzco has elected him,
For the late king chose him,
Giving him the royal fringe;
We could elect no other.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
I hasten to bring my bed here.[60]

(Exit running.)
SCENE 2

Great hall of the palace of Tupac Yupanqui. The INCA seated on golden tiana (C.).

(Enter the HIGH PRIEST or UILLAC UMA, with priests and chosen Virgins of the Sun. The INCA dressed as his father. Uillac Uma in full dress, wearing the huampar chucu. Virgins in white with gold belts and diadems. They range themselves by the throne (L.). Then enter RUMI-ÑAUI and a crowd of chiefs, all in full dress, ranging themselves by the throne (R.).)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
This day, O Councillors and Chiefs,
Let all receive my benison;
You Holy Virgins of the Sun[61]
Receive our father’s tenderest care.
The realm, rejoicing, hails me king;
From deep recesses of my heart
I swear to seek the good of all.

UILLAC UMA.
To-day the smoke of many beasts
Ascends on high towards the sun,
The Deity with joy accepts
The sacrifice of prayer and praise.
We found in ashes of the birds
Our only Inca, King, and Lord,
In the great llama sacrifice;
All there beheld an eagle’s form,
We opened it for augury,
But lo! the heart and entrails gone.
The eagle Anti-suyu means—
To thy allegiance they return.

(Bowing to the Inca.)

Thus I, thy augur, prophesy.

(Acclamation.) (Exeunt all but Uillac Uma and Rumi-ñaui.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
(turning to Rumi-ñaui).
Behold the Hanan-suyu Chief
Who let the enemy escape,
Who led to almost certain death
So many thousands of my men.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Before his death thy father knew
Disaster had befallen me;
’Tis true, O King, it was my fault,
Like a stone[62] I gave my orders,
And volleying stones soon beat me down;
It was with stones I had to fight,
And in the end they crushed my men.
Oh! grant me, Lord, a single chance,
Give perfect freedom to my plans,
Myself will to the fortress march,
And I will leave it desolate.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
For thee to strive with all thy might,
For thee thine honour to regain,
For thou shalt ne’er command my men
Unless thy worthiness is proved.

UILLAC UMA.
Not many days shall pass, O King,
E’er all the Antis are subdued.
I’ve seen it in the quipu roll,
Haste! Haste! thou Rumi Tunqui. [63]

(Exeunt.)
SCENE 3

The great terrace entrance to Ollantay-tampu. On R. a long masonry wall with recesses at intervals. At back a great entrance doorway. On L. terraces descend, with view of valley and mountains.

(Guards discovered at entrance doorway. To them enter RUMI-ÑAUI in rags, his face cut and slashed with wounds, and covered with blood.)

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Will no one here have pity on me?

ONE OF THE GUARDS.
Who art thou, man?
Who has ill-treated thee?
Thou comest in a frightful state,
Covered with blood and gaping wounds.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Go quickly to thy king and say
That one he loves has come to him.

ONE OF THE GUARDS.
Thy name?

RUMI-ÑAUI.
There is no need to give a name.

ONE OF THE GUARDS.
Wait here.

(Exit one of the guards.)

(Enter OLLANTAY with guards, R. front.)

RUMI-ÑAUI.
A thousand times I thee salute,
Ollantay, great and puissant king!
Have pity on a fugitive
Who seeks a refuge here with thee.

OLLANTAY.
Who art thou, man? Approach nearer.
Who has thus ill-treated thee?
Were such deep and fearful wounds
Caused by a fall, or what mishap?

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Thou knowest me, O mighty chief.
I am that stone that fell down once,
But now I fall before thy feet;
O Inca! mercy! Raise me up!

(Kneels.)

OLLANTAY.
Art thou the noble Rumi-ñaui,
Great Chief and Lord of Hanan-suyu?

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Yes, I was that well-known Chief—
A bleeding fugitive to-day.
Ollantay. Rise, comrade mine. Let us embrace.

(Rises.)

Who has dared to treat thee thus,
And who has brought thee here to me
Within my fortress, on my hearth?

(To attendants.)

Bring new clothes for my oldest friend.

(Exit an attendant.)

How is it that thou art alone?
Camest thou not fearing death?

RUMI-ÑAUI.
A new king reigns in Cuzco now—
Tupac Yupanqui is installed.
Against the universal wish,
He rose upon a wave of blood;
Safety he sees in headless trunks,
The sunchu[64] and the nucchu[65] red
Are sent to all he would destroy.
Doubtless you have not forgot
That I was Hanan-suyu’s Chief.
Yupanqui ordered me to come;
Arrived, I came before the king,
And as he has a cruel heart,
He had me wounded as you see;
And now thou knowest, king and friend,
How this new Inca treated me.

OLLANTAY.
Grieve not, old friend Rumi-ñaui,
Thy wounds before all must be cured;
I see in thee th’ avenging knife,
To use against the tyrant’s heart.
At Tampu now we celebrate
The Sun’s great Raymi festival;
On that day all who love my name,
Throughout my realms hold festival.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Those three days of festival
To me will be a time of joy,
Perhaps I may be healed by then,
So that my heart may pleasure seek.

OLLANTAY.
It will be so. For three whole nights
We drink and feast, to praise the Sun,
The better to cast all care aside
We shall be shut in Tampu fort.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
The youths, as is their wont, will find
Their great delight in those three nights,
Then will they rest from all their toils,
And carry off the willing girls.
SCENE 4

A corridor in the palace of Chosen Virgins.

(Enter YMA SUMAC and PITU SALLA.)

YMA SUMAC.
Pitu Salla, beloved friend,
How long wilt thou conceal from me
The secret that I long to know?
Think, dearest, of my anxious heart,
How I shall be in constant grief
Until you tell the truth to me.
Within these hard and cruel bounds
Does some one suffer for my sins?
My sweet companion, do not hide
From me, who ’tis that mourns and weeps
Somewhere within the garden walls.
How is it she is so concealed
That I can never find the place?

PITU SALLA.
My Sumac, now I’ll tell thee all—
Only concerning what you hear,
And still more surely what you see,
You must be dumb as any stone;
And you too must be well prepared
For a most sad heart-rending sight—
’Twill make thee weep for many days.

YMA SUMAC.
I will not tell a living soul
What you divulge. But tell me all,
I’ll shut it closely in my heart.
SCENE 5

A secluded part of the gardens of the Virgins, (L.) flowers, (R.) a thicket of mulli[66] and chilca,[67] concealing a stone door.

(PITU SALLA and YMA SUMAC.)

PITU SALLA.
In this garden is a door of stone,
But wait until the Mothers sleep,
The night comes on. Wait here for me.

(Exit.)

(Yma Sumac reclines on a bank and sleeps.
Night comes on, Yma Sumac awakes.)

YMA SUMAC.
A thousand strange presentiments
Crowd on me now, I scarce know what—
Perhaps I shall see that mournful one
Whose fate already breaks my heart.

(Pitu Salla returns with a cup of water, a small covered vase containing food, and a torch which she gives to Yma Sumac. She leads Yma Sumac through bushes to the stone door, fixes the torch, presses something, and the door swings round.)

(CUSI COYLLUR is discovered senseless, extended on the ground, a snake twining itself round her waist.)

PITU SALLA.
Behold the princess for whom you seek.
Well! is thy heart now satisfied?

YMA SUMAC.
Oh, my friend, what do I behold?
Is it a corpse that I must see?
Oh, horror! A dungeon for the dead!

(She faints.)

PITU SALLA.
What misfortune has now arrived?
O my Sumac, my dearest love,
O come to thyself without delay!
Arouse thee. Arise, my lovely flower.

(Yma Sumac revives.)

Fear not, my dove, my lovely friend,
’Tis not a corpse. The princess lives,
Unhappy, forlorn, she lingers here.

YMA SUMAC.
Is she, then, still a living being?

PITU SALLA.
Approach nearer, and you can help.
She lives indeed. Look. Watch her now.
Give me the water and the food.

(To Cusi Coyllur, while helping her to sit up.)

O fair princess, I bring thee food
And cooling water to refresh.
Try to sit up. I come with help.

YMA SUMAC.
Who art thou, my sweetest dove?
Why art thou shut in such a place?

PITU SALLA.
Take a little food, we pray.
Perchance without it, you may die.

CUSI COYLLUR.
How happy am I now to see,
After these long and dismal years,
The new and lovely face of one
Who comes with thee and gives me joy.

YMA SUMAC.
O my princess, my sister dear,
Sweet bird, with bosom of pure gold,
What crime can they accuse thee of,
That they can make thee suffer thus?
What cruel fate has placed thee here
With death on watch in serpent’s form?

CUSI COYLLUR.
O charming child, the seed of love,
Sweet flower for my broken heart,
I have been thrust in this abyss.
I once was joined to a man
As pupil is part of the eye;
But alas! has he forgotten me?
The King know not that we were joined
By such indissoluble bonds,
And when he came to ask my hand,
That King dismissed him in a rage,
And cruelly confined me here.
Many years have passed since then,
Yet, as you see, I’m still alive;
No single soul have I beheld
For all those sad and dismal years,
Nor have I found relief nor hope.
But who art thou, my dear, my love,
So young, so fresh, so pitiful?

YMA SUMAC.
I too, like thee, am full of grief,
For long I’ve wished to see and love,
My poor forlorn and sad princess.
No father, no mother are mine,
And there are none to care for me.

CUSI COYLLUR.
What age art thou?

YMA SUMAC.
I ought to number many years,
For I detest this dreadful house,
And as it is a dreary place,
The time in it seems very long.

PITU SALLA.
She ought to number just ten years
According to the account I’ve kept.

CUSI COYLLUR.
And what is thy name?

YMA SUMAC.
They call me Yma Sumac now,
But to give it me is a mistake.

CUSI COYLLUR.
O my daughter! O my lost love,
Come to thy mother’s yearning heart.

(Embraces Yma Sumac.)

Thou art all my happiness,
My daughter, come, O come to me;
This joy quite inundates my soul,
It is the name I gave to thee.

YMA SUMAC.
O my mother, to find thee thus!
We must be parted never more.
Do not abandon me in grief.
To whom can I turn to free thee,
To whom can I appeal for right?

PITU SALLA.
Make no noise, my dearest friend.
To find us thus would ruin me.
Let us go. I fear the Mothers.

YMA SUMAC.
(to Cusi Coyllur).
Suffer a short time longer here,
Until I come to take thee hence,
Patience for a few more days.
Alas! my mother dear! I go,
But full of love, to seek for help.

(Exeunt closing the stone door, all but Cusi Coyllur. They extinguish the torch.)
SCENE 6

Great hall in the palace of Tupac Yupanqui.

(The INCA discovered seated on the tiana. To him enter the UILLAC UMA, in full dress.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
I greet thee, great and noble Priest!
Hast thou no news of Rumi-ñaui.

UILLAC UMA.
Last night, with guards, I wandered out
On heights towards Uilcanuta.
Far off I saw a crowd in chains,
No doubt the Anti prisoners,v For they are all defeated quite.
The cacti[68] on the mountains smoke,
E’en now the fortress is in flames.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
And Ollantay, is he taken?
Perhaps—I hope his life is saved.

UILLAC UMA.
Ollantay was among the flames,
’Tis said that no one has escaped.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
The Sun, my Father, is my shield,
I am my father’s chosen child.
We must subdue the rebel host,
For that I am appointed here.

(Enter a CHASQUI with a quipu in his hand.)

THE CHASQUI.
This morning at the dawn of day,
Rumi-ñaui despatched this quipu.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
(to the Uillac Uma).
See what it says.

UILLAC UMA.
This knot, coloured burnt ahuarancu,
Tells us that Tampu too is burnt;
This triple knot to which is hung
Another which is quintuple,
In all of quintuples are three,
Denotes that Anti-suyu’s thine,
Its ruler prisoner of war.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
(to the Chasqui).
And thou. Where wert thou?

THE CHASQUI.
Sole King and Lord! Child of the Sun!
I am the first to bring the news,
That thou mayst trample on the foe,
And in thine anger drink their blood.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Did I not reiterate commands
To spare and not to shed their blood—
Not anger but pity is my rule.

THE CHASQUI.
O Lord, we have not shed their blood;
They were all captured in the night,
Unable to resist our force.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Recount to me in full detail
The circumstances of the war.

THE CHASQUI.
For a signal thy warriors wait.
The nights passed at Tinquiqueru,[69]
Concealed in the cavern below,
Yanahuara[70] men joining us late.

We waited within the large cave,
Thy men always ready to fight,
Behind foliage well out of sight,
Thy warriors patient and brave.

But for three long days and dark nights,
No food for the zealous and bold;
Feeling hungry, thirsty, and cold,
We waited and watched for the lights.[71]

Rumi-ñaui sent orders at length,
When the Raymi[72] they carelessly keep,
And all of them drunk or asleep,
We were then to rush on with our strength.

Word came to surprise our foes,
Rumi-ñaui had opened the gate,
As cautious and silent as fate—
We were masters with none to oppose.

Those rebels fell into the trap,
The arrows came on them like rain,
Most died in their sleep without pain,
Not knowing their fatal mishap.

Ollantay, still trusting, was ta’en,
The same Urco Huaranca befell;
Hanco Huayllu is captive as well,
We thy rebels in fetters detain.

The Antis by thousands are slain,
A fearful example is made,
They are beaten, crushed, and betrayed,
Their women in sorrow and pain.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
As witness of what has occurred,
On Vilcamayu’s storied banks,
No doubt thou hast told me the truth.
It was a well designed attack.

(Enter RUMI-ÑAUI followed by several chiefs.)

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Great Inca, I kneel at thy feet,
This time You will hear my report,
I beseech thee to deign to restore
The trust that I forfeited once.

(Kneels.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Rise, great Chief, receive my regard,
I accept thy great service with joy;
Thou didst cast o’er the waters thy net,
And hast captured a marvellous fish.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Our enemies perished in crowds,
Their chiefs were captured and bound,
Overwhelmed by my terrible force,
Like a rook detached from the heights.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Was much blood shed in the assault?

RUMI-ÑAUI.
No, Lord, not a drop has been shed,
To thine orders I strictly adhered.
Those Antis were strangled in sleep,
But the fort is entirely razed.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Where are the rebels?

RUMI-ÑAUI.
They are waiting with agonised fear,
For their fate, to perish by cords.
The people are sending up cries,
Demanding their deaths without fail.
Their women are now in their midst,
The children raise hideous cries;
It is well that thine order should pass
To finish their traitorous lives.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
It must be so without any doubt,
That the orphans may not be alone,
Let all perish, not sparing one,
Thus Cuzco recovers her peace,
Let the traitors be brought before me.
In my presence the sentence they’ll hear.

(Exit Rumi-ñaui, and re-enter followed by guards in charge of OLLANTAY, URCO HUARANCA, and HANCO HAUYLLU, bound and blindfold, followed by guards with PIQUI CHAQUI bound.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Take the bands off the eyes of those men.
And now, Ollantay, where art thou?
And where art thou, O Mountain Chief?
Soon thou wilt roll down from the heights.

(To the soldiers who bring in Piqui Chaqui.)

Whom have we here?

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Many fleas in the Yuncas abound,
And torment the people full sore,
With boiling water they are killed,
And I, poor flea,[73] must also die.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Tell me, Hanco Huayllu, tell me,
Why art thou Ollantay’s man?
Did not my father honour thee?
Did he not grant thy requests?
Did he ever have a secret from thee?
Speak also, you, the other rebels,
Ollantay and the Mountain Chief.

OLLANTAY.
O father, we have nought to say,
Our crimes are overwhelming us.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
(to the Uillac Uma).
Pronounce their sentence, great High Priest.

UILLAC UMA.
The light that fills me from the Sun
Brings mercy and pardon to my heart.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Now thy sentence, Rumi-ñaui.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
For crimes enormous such as these
Death should ever be the doom
It is the only way, O King!
To warn all others from such guilt.
To stout tocarpus[74] they should be
Secured and bound with toughest rope,
Then should the warriors freely shoot
Their arrows until death is caused.

PIQUI CHAQUI.
Must it be that evermore
The Antis must all perish thus?
Alas! then let the branches burn
What pouring out of blood is here.[75]

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Silence, rash man, nor dare to speak,

(General lamentation outside.)

Having been rolled just like a stone,
My heart has now become a stone.[76]

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Know that tocarpus are prepared.
Remove those traitors from my sight,
Let them all perish, and at once.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Take these three men without delay
To the dreaded execution stakes;
Secure them with unyielding ropes,
And hurl them from the lofty rocks.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Stop! Cast off their bonds.

(The guards unbind them. They all kneel.)

(To Ollantay, kneeling).
Rise from thy knees; come to my side.

(Rises.)

Now thou hast seen death very near,
You that have shown ingratitude,
Learn how mercy flows from my heart;
I will raise thee higher than before.
Thou wert Chief of Anti-suyu,
Now see how far my love will go;
I make thee Chief in permanence.
Receive this plume as general,
This arrow[77] emblem of command.[78]

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
(to the Uillac Uma).
Thou mighty Pontiff of the Sun,
Robe him in the regal dress.
Raise up the others from their knees,
And free them from the doom of death.

(Urco Huaranca, Hanco Huayllu, and Piqui Chaqui rise, the latter looking much relieved. The Uillac Uma places the robe on Ollantay’s shoulders.)

UILLAC UMA.
Ollantay, learn to recognise
Tupac Yupanqui’s generous mind;
From this day forth be thou his friend,
And bless his magnanimity.
This ring contains my potent charm,
For this I place it on thy hand.

(Gives him a ring, or bracelet.)

This mace receive, ’tis from the king,

(Gives him a mace (champi).)

It is his gracious gift to thee.

OLLANTAY.
With tears I shall nearly consume
That mace thus presented to me;
I am tenfold the great Inca’s slave,
In this world no equal is found,
My heart’s fibres his latchets shall be;
From this moment my body and soul
To his service alone shall belong.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Now, Mountain Chief! come near to me,
Ollantay is given the arrow and plume,
Though to me he gave fury and war.
Notwithstanding all that has passed
He continues the Andean chief,
And will lead his rebels to peace;
Thee also I choose for the plume;
From this day thou art a great chief,
And never forget in thy thoughts,
I saved thee from death and disgrace.

URCO HUARANCA.
Great King and most merciful Lord,
But now, expecting my death,
I am ever thy most faithful slave.

(Uillac Uma gives him the plume and arrow.)

UILLAC UMA.
O Urco, the Inca has made
A great and a powerful chief,
And grants thee with marvellous grace
The arrow and also the plume.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Illustrious King, I venture to ask,
Will Anti-suyu have two chiefs.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
There will not be two, O Rumi-ñaui
The Mountain Chief will rule the Antis;
In Cuzco Ollantay will reign—
As Viceroy deputed by me
His duties will call him to act
As ruler throughout the whole realm.

OLLANTAY.
O King! thou dost raise me too high,
A man without service or claim;
I am thy obedient slave—
Mayst thou live for a thousand years.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
The mascapaycha now bring forth,
And to it the llautu attach.
Uillac Uma, adorn him with these,
And proclaim his state to the world.
Yes, Ollantay shall stand in my place,
Raised up like the star of the morn,
For Colla this month I shall start;
All preparations are made.
In Cuzco Ollantay will stay,
My Ranti[79] and Viceroy and friend.

OLLANTAY.
I would fain, O magnanimous King,
Follow thee in the Chayanta war;
Thou knowest my love for such work.
Peaceful Cuzco is not to my taste,
I prefer to be thy Canari,[80]
To march in the van of thy force,
And not to be left in the rear.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Thou shouldst find the wife of thy choice,
And with her reign happily here
In Cuzco; repose without care;
Rest here while I’m absent in war.

OLLANTAY.
Great King, thy sorrowful slave
Already had chosen a wife.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
How is it I know not of this?
It should be reported to me.
I will load her with suitable gifts;
Why was this concealed from my eyes?

OLLANTAY.
In Cuzco itself disappeared
That sweet and adorable dove;
One day she did rest in my arms,
And the next no more to be seen.
In grief I made search far and near,
Earth seemed to have swallowed her up,
To have buried her far from my sight;
O such, mighty King, is my grief.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Ollantay! afflict not thyself,
For now thou must take up thy place
Without turning thy eyes from thy work.

(To Uillac Uma.)

High priest, obey my command.

(The Uillac Uma goes to the wings (R.) and addresses the people outside.)

UILLAC UMA.
O people, hear what I say:
The Inca, our King and our Lord,
Thus declares his imperial will:
Ollantay shall reign in his place.

PEOPLE outside.
Ollantay Ranti! Ollantay Ranti!

(Shouts and acclamations.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
(to Rumi-ñaui and other chiefs.)
You also render him homage.

RUMI-ÑAUI.
Prince Ollantay! Incap Ranti!
Thy promotion gives me joy.
All the Antis now released,
Return rejoicing to their homes.

(He and all the Chiefs bow to Ollantay.)

GUARDS WITHOUT.
You cannot pass. Go back! go back!
Voice without. Why, is this a festive day?
Let me pass. I must see the king;
I pray you do not stop me,
Do not drive me from the door;
If you stop me I shall die.
Have a care. You will kill me.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
What noise is that without?

GUARD.
It is a young girl who comes weeping
And insists upon seeing the king.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Let her come in.

(Enter Yma Sumac.)

YMA SUMAC.
Which is the Inca, my lord,
That I may kneel down at his feet?

UILLAC UMA.
Who art thou, charming maid?
Behold the King.

(Yma Sumac throws herself at the King’s feet.)

YMA SUMAC.
O my King! be thou my father,
Snatch from evil thy poor servant.
Extend thy royal hand to me.
O merciful child of the Sun,
My mother is dying at this hour
In a foul and loathsome cave;
She is killed in cruel martyrdom—
Alas! she is bathed in her own blood.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
What inhumanity, poor child!
Ollantay, take this case in hand.

OLLANTAY.
Young maiden, take me quickly there;
We will see who it is that suffers.

YMA SUMAC.
No, sir. Not so. It is the King himself
Should go with me.
Perhaps he may recognise her;

(To Ollantay.)

For you, I know not who you are.
O King, arise, do not delay,
I fear my mother breathes her last,
At least may be in mortal pain;
O Inca! Father! grant my prayer.

UILLAC UMA.
Illustrious King, thou wilt consent;
Let us all seek this luckless one—
Thou canst release from cruel bonds.
Lot us go, O King!

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
(rising).
Come all! Come all!
In midst of reconciliations
This young maid assaults my heart.

(Exeunt.)
SCENE 7

The garden in the palace of Virgins of the Sun (same scene as Act III, Scene 5). Stone door more visible.

(Enter the INCA TUPAC YUPANQUI with YMA SUMAC, OLLANTAY, UILLAC UMA and RUMI nAUI; URCO HUARANCA, HANCO HUAYLLU and PIQUI CHAQUI in the background.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
But this is the Aclla Huasi;[81]
My child, art thou not mistaken?
Where is thy imprisoned mother?

YMA SUMAC.
In a dungeon within these bounds
My mother has suffered for years,
Perhaps even now she is dead.

(She points to the stone door.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
What door is this?

(Enter MAMA CCACCA and PITU SALLA. Mama Ccacca kneels and kisses the Inca’s hand.)

MAMA CCACCA.
Is it a dream or reality,
That I behold my sovereign?
Tupac Yupanqui. Open that door.

(Mama Ccacca opens the door.)

(CUSI COYLLUR discovered chained and fainting, with a puma and a snake, one on each side of her.)

YMA SUMAC.
O my mother, I feared to find
That you had already passed away;
Pitu Salla! Haste. Bring water.
Perhaps my dove may still revive.

(Exit Pitu Salla.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
What horrid cavern do I see?
Who is this woman? what means it?
What cruel wretch thus tortures her?
What means that chain bound around her?
Mama Ccacca, come near to me
What hast thou to say to this?v Is it the effect of malice
That this poor creature lingers here?

MAMA CCACCA.
It was thy father’s dread command;
A punishment for lawless love.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Begone! begone! harder than rock.[82]
Turn out that puma and the snake,[83]
Break down that door of carved stone.
(To Mama Ccacca.)
Let me not see thy face again.
A woman living as a bat;
This child has brought it all to light.

(Enter Pitu Salla with water. She sprinkles it over Cusi Coyllur, who revives.)

CUSI COYLLUR.
Where am I? who are these people?
Yma Sumac, my beloved child,
Come to me, my most precious dove.
Who are all these men before me?

(She begins to faint again and is restored by water.)

YMA SUMAC.
Fear not, my mother, ’tis the King;
The King himself comes to see you.
The great Yupanqui is now here.
Speak to him. Awake from thy trance.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
My heart is torn and sorrowful
At sight of so much misery.
Who art thou, my poor sufferer?
Child, tell me now thy mother’s name?

YMA SUMAC.
Father! Inca! Clement Prince!
Have those cruel bonds removed.

UILLAC UMA.
It is for me to remove them,
And to relieve this sore distress.

(Cuts the rope fastening Cusi Coyllur to the wall.)

OLLANTAY.
(to Yma Sumac).
What is thy mother’s name?

YMA SUMAC.
Her name was once Cusi Coyllur,
But it seems a mistake. Her joy
Was gone when she was prisoned here.

OLLANTAY.
O renowned King, great Yupanqui,
In her you see my long lost wife.

(Prostrates himself before the Inca.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
It all appears a dream to me.
The ‘Star’! my sister![84] and thy wife.
O sister! what newly found joy.
O Cusi Coyllur, my sister,
Come here to me, and embrace me,
Now thou art delivered from woe.

(Music.)

Thou hast found thy loving brother;
Joy calms the anguish of my heart.

(Embraces Cusi Coyllur.)

CUSI COYLLUR.
Alas! my brother, now you know
The cruel tortures I endured
During those years of agony;
Thy compassion now has saved me.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Who art thou, dove, that hast suffered?
For what sin were you prisoned here?
Thou mightest have lost thy reason.
Thy face is worn, thy beauty gone,
Thy looks as one risen from death.

OLLANTAY.
Cusi Coyllur, I had lost thee,
Thou wast quite hidden from my sight,
But thou art brought again to life—
Thy father should have killed us both.
My whole heart is torn with sorrow.
Star of joy, where is now thy joy?
Where now thy beauty as a star?
Art thou under thy father’s curse?

CUSI COYLLUR.
Ollantay, for ten dreary years
That dungeon has kept us apart;
But now, united for new life,
Some happiness may yet be ours.
Yupanqui makes joy succeed grief,
He may well count[85] for many years.

UILLAC UMA.
Bring new robes to dress the princess.

(They put on her royal robes. The High Priest kisses her hand.)

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Ollantay, behold thy royal wife,
Honour and cherish her henceforth.
And thou, Yma Sumac, come to me,
I enlace you in the thread of love;
Thou art the pure essence of Coyllur.

(Embraces her.)

OLLANTAY.
Thou art our protector, great King,
Thy noble hands disperse our grief;
Thou art our faith and only hope—
Thou workest by virtue’s force.

TUPAC YUPANQUI.
Thy wife is now in thy arms;
All sorrow now should disappear,
Joy, new born, shall take its place.

(Acclamations from the Chiefs, and Piqui Chaqui. Music: huancars (drums), pincullus (flutes), and pututus (clarions).)



